Project Gutenberg's In the Garden of Delight, by Lily Hardy Hammond

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: In the Garden of Delight

Author: Lily Hardy Hammond

Release Date: November 12, 2020 [EBook #63729]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE GARDEN OF DELIGHT ***




Produced by Mardi Desjardins & the online Distributed
Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net





[Illustration]




                            IN THE GARDEN OF
                                DELIGHT


                                   BY

                             L. H. HAMMOND

               AUTHOR OF “THE MASTER-WORD,” “IN BLACK AND
                              WHITE,” ETC.


                                NEW YORK
                       THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                            COPYRIGHT, 1916,
                      BY THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY




                                   To

                           LUCY AND CALDWELL

                 IN MEMORY OF THE WHEELED-CHAIR SUMMER
                             AT PEN-Y-BRYN




                                CONTENTS


                                CHAPTER               PAGE
                  I. A COUNTRY CHILD                     1
                 II. BIRD CORNERS                       16
                III. IN MAKE-BELIEVE                    37
                 IV. THE DARK O’ THE YEAR               57
                  V. PREMONITIONS                       81
                 VI. BEFORE THE DAWN                   115
                VII. SPRING MAGIC                      126
               VIII. BLACKBIRD DIPLOMACY               150
                 IX. THE PROOF OF COURAGE              169
                  X. THE ROUTING OF UNCLE JASON        186
                 XI. WHERE THE BATTLE WAS FOUGHT       204
                XII. IN THE GARDEN OF DELIGHT          229
               XIII. WHILE THE NEST WAS BUILDING       241




                                   I
                            A COUNTRY CHILD


THERE is one thing, at least, in this puzzling world which, though
everything changes it, nothing can spoil: and that is out-of-doors. Long
ago, when this place was stately old Cedarhurst instead of home-y Bird
Corners, and I a wilful small girl climbing trees and tearing my frocks
whenever Great-aunt Virginia and Great-aunt Letitia were both looking
the other way at the same time—a coincidence as blissful as it was
infrequent—I thought being outdoors was heaven enough for anybody.

In the long winter afternoons I sat by the big wood fire in the back
parlor and hemmed towels and napkins—when I wasn’t pulling out
yesterday’s work because Great-aunt Virginia found the stitches too big:
and I looked out at the cold, bare hills, blue and beautiful against the
pale sky, and longed to play over them like the winds, and to be whirled
up into the air like the brown leaves which scurried about them all
winter long. And in the spring, when the budding branches draped the
trees with jewelled mists, all silver and green and gold and ruby-red, I
wished the great-aunts had learned to play on the grass with their whole
selves, instead of just with their fingers on the big old rosewood
piano, which stood stiff and square in the front parlor, an instrument
of torture to rebellious hands that longed to be pulling wild-flowers,
and to ears tuned to catch the songs of birds. And in summer time, when
the rain blotted out the hills, and every leaf of every tree sang the
Song of the Rushing Winds; when the lightning ran zig-zag all over the
sky and the thunder jarred the house—oh, why should great-aunts call
one indoors, and shut the free winds out, and put cotton in their ears,
and make little girls come away from the windows, and the chimneys, and
every place where they wanted to be, instead of leaving them out in the
rain to be drenched like the flowers and shake themselves dry like the
birds?

And in autumn—but those memories are too painful! On frosty days the
house was shut tight, the log fires kindled, and my small person swathed
in insufferable flannels—flannels!—in a Tennessee October! And when I
rebelled, there were fearsome tales of children who had died of
pneumonia, or gone into consumption, because their misguided relatives
had allowed them to play outdoors in the cold.

And yet outdoors was never more beautiful. Some of the hills were far
and blue, and some were near and green, or brown with stubble, or yellow
with stalks of corn. The grass in the pasture was greenest green; and
when I slipped out on the back porch the sycamores down by the brook
rustled their drying leaves and called me as loud as they dared. And the
doves flew by in flocks, and the killdeers whirred up from the valley
with wild, free cries, and the field-larks sang on the fence-posts, or
lighted on the short, sweet grass, the white of their outer tail
feathers shining in the sun. But Great-aunt Letitia would call me back
to the parlor, where she made tea, which she and Great-aunt Virginia
drank, sitting in rosewood arm-chairs, dressed in soft shimmering silks,
with cobwebby lace about their throats.

I myself balanced unhappily upon one of the big square ottomans, too
small to get far enough back on it to have any purchase against the
slippery horsehair, and painfully conscious of Great-aunt Virginia’s
eyes on my awkwardly swinging feet. I kept my place as best I could,
holding a bit of egg-shell china, and sipping my odious cambric tea.

This was the chosen time to instill proper principles of conduct into my
callous little soul. The gentle old aunts made a duet of it, and I
always thought they practiced it together beforehand, like a “piece” on
the piano. It was really very easy not to hear!

I always sat on the ottoman nearest the center table. The other was
nearer the east window, and showed the long front drive bordered by the
stiff lines of cedars, which gave Cedarhurst its name before the
great-aunts were born. But the one by the table had the double advantage
of giving me a dutiful appearance, being equally distant from both of
the arm-chairs, and of allowing me, by an almost imperceptible sliding
to one corner, to look out of the silver-maple window to the jug of
water I kept in the center of the seven trunks, a drinking fountain for
all the birds of the place. I sat very still during the duet, my head
raised a little to see the lowest branches, where the birds always
alighted; and I often quite forgot my cambric tea until Great-aunt
Letitia gently reminded me of it. My docility touched them very much. I
heard Great-aunt Letitia tell Great-aunt Virginia one day that she was
afraid I would never live to grow up, my expression was so rapt when
they urged my duty upon me; and she felt as though there were an
invisible halo above my little brown head. I was running in through the
hall when I heard this, and stopped in breathless amazement. I had no
thought of eavesdropping, but I saw Great-aunt Virginia wipe her eyes;
and Great-aunt Letitia almost sniffed. I sat stiller than ever after
that, and rolled my eyes a little; and Great-aunt Letitia sent for the
doctor, who said I needed calico dresses and mud pies. The great-aunts
were shocked at first, but the doctor was firm. And after that I played
outdoors unless the thermometer was very unkind and the wind in an
especially dangerous quarter.

There are really two of the-most-beautiful-place-in-the-world. One of
them is the real outdoors; and the other is outdoors in the Land of
Make-Believe. The advantage of the real outdoors is that its loveliness
is ready-made. One invents nothing; one merely opens eyes and ears and
soul to drink in beauty and joy, and learns, almost without knowing it,
the most curious and interesting things. The advantage of Make-Believe
is that when things are as they shouldn’t be, one can instantly step
over into that blessed country and make them be exactly what they
should. No one ever sees you do it, either, or guesses that you can make
a world in a twinkling, out of dreams. It has all the charm and mystery
of a fairy ring, or fern seed, or Aladdin’s lamp. One’s body can perch
on a horsehair piano stool, twisting one’s two little meat legs about
its one fat leg of rosewood, and great-aunts may be sure you are
practising scales most faithfully; and all the time you are really
running races in the wind with charming, dirty children who tear their
dresses all day long, and never had their hair in curl-papers in their
lives.

And that is only the beginning. For one can learn so well the road to
that dear land that one never forgets it, even in grown-up days. There
is never any sickness in Make-Believe. One can walk and run there
always, though one’s body lies weak and helpless, or drags slowly about,
year after year, in a world that is full of pain. One can slip away from
the long, black, sleepless nights into a lovely world where imagination
is the motive power, and all one needs and all one longs for lie ready
to one’s hand.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was the January after I was sixteen that Cedarhurst burned down. It
was a bitter cold time; and the heaviest snow I had ever seen turned my
familiar world into fairyland under the winter moon.

It was Great-aunt Letitia who found the fire. She had been looking for
it all her life. One of the most familiar memories of my childhood is
the waking at night to hear a soft rustle past my open door—the doors
were always left open that we might smell the fire when we really had
one—and to see Great-aunt Letitia, her white hair tucked away under a
dainty nightcap and the light of her candle bringing out soft gleams in
her flowered silk dressing gown, as she followed her highbred nose to
the spot where it assured her a fire had broken out. It used to frighten
me at first; but I grew too accustomed to it even to wake. So it taxed
my credulity to the utmost when, on that bitter night, she roused me to
tell me with tense white lips that Cedarhurst was in flames.

How the fire started, we never knew. It burst through the floor of the
empty guest room first, and the ceiling of the dining-room below it. But
however it started, it was there; and there was no one to fight it but
two fragile old ladies, a half-grown girl, and the terrified Negroes. It
was before the days of rural telephones, and the house was in ruins
before any one in the village knew our need. We carried the news
ourselves when we drove into Chatterton in the gray dawn, shivering with
cold. We were all fully dressed, of course; the great-aunts would have
perished in the flames before they would have shocked the stars of
heaven by appearing outdoors in the mildest disarray. And we saved the
family silver, a portrait or two, great-grandmother’s sewing table, a
few books, and the clothes upon our backs.

On the way to the village Great-aunt Virginia said we had much to be
thankful for in that our lives were spared; but hers, had we known it,
was already lost. She had stood in the snow after the flames barred all
access to the house, until the roof fell in and her birthplace was a
mass of ruins; and before we had been a week at the home of her nephew,
Cousin William Wrenn, she had died of pneumonia, leaving Great-aunt
Letitia and me, as she told us in the parting, alone and unprotected
save for the Father of all, to whom she trusted us.

But Great-aunt Letitia, whom every one expected to wither and droop
without her sister’s sheltering care, developed an amazing power of
decision. She seemed crushed at first. But on the fourth day after
Great-aunt Virginia had been laid to rest in the hillside burial ground
at home, she came into the family sitting room, looking, in her deep
mourning, very tall and white and frail, and announced that she had
decided not to rebuild Cedarhurst, but to go to the city to live.

I could scarcely believe my ears. The city’s outmost edge was only
fifteen miles away, but even the village of Chatterton, peopled largely
by our own relatives, seemed crowded and bustling after the wide quiet
of the fields at home. That this frail, retiring old lady should
contemplate a plunge into the vortex of a city whose inhabitants were
numbered by tens of thousands—really several tens—seemed madness. But
her determination was fixed.

“This dear child needs the advantages of city life,” she declared. “I
always found the country exceedingly quiet myself, and-er not
altogether—progressive. But I deferred to Sister Virginia’s judgment.
Now, however—” her voice trembled a moment, and then went on quite
steadily—“the responsibility is mine, and I cannot shirk it. I think
Lydia should have city advantages. I shall go there and devote myself to
her education, and prepare for her entrance into society at the proper
time.”

Argument was of no avail. When I avouched my preference for the country
she said quietly that I knew nothing of the city yet, and that every one
should try more than one side of life before making a final choice. She
was very gentle, but Great-aunt Virginia herself could not have been
more inflexible. We went, to the envy of my cousin, Billy Wrenn, and to
my own silent and passionate grief.

As I grew older, Aunt Letitia grew younger—younger, that is, in her
ideas and in her desires for me. She cared far more than I about my
clothes, and took a livelier interest in possible lovers. I understood,
beneath this late blossoming of pleasure in what she called gay life,
the starved aspirations of her own youth, shut away in the seclusion of
her beautiful home during the many years of her widowed mother’s
invalidism and morbid grieving for her husband. There were times when
her dead-and-gone girlhood rose to life in her eyes, and a soft color
tinged her delicate cheeks, as she imagined for me some small social
triumph or admired me in some new dress. I divined that she was
immensely interested in my men friends, though her shyness in discussing
them was even greater than her interest. I wondered often if she had a
love-story of her own; but I never knew. My own love-story, when it
came, gave her great happiness; and for three years after my marriage
she lived with us in great content, and passed out at last in utter
peace.

My husband is known in our family circle as the Peon, since he entered
into a contract to work for me without wages for life. He brought into
our home at our marriage his brother’s orphaned child, David Bird, a
little fellow four years of age, who flatly refused to call me auntie
and dubbed me Mammy Lil. That was many years ago; and as the time has
passed the Peon and I have realized with deepening gratitude our debt to
the little child who has given our home its crowning joy. But for David
we would have been childless, growing old alone; for we owe Caro to
David, too. I have never flattered myself that we could have captured
and held the heart of that tricksey birdling if David had not added to
our attractions childhood’s lure to a child.

For our years in the city, however, we found David sufficient in
himself. He has grown up like the Peon’s own son, sturdy, steady, large
of body and of heart. He has stood well in his classes without much
effort; but more because it is his disposition to do thoroughly whatever
he does at all than because of any great love for books. He is
deliberate in manner, and somewhat slow of speech; and his steady gray
eyes seem made to look facts in the face. He has always moved in
straight lines, mentally and physically, cutting through obstacles which
Caro would flutter around in a twinkling; yet somehow he arrived at the
goal in time to secure whatever he set out to obtain. He was rather too
solemn as a child, and regarded me, apparently, somewhat as the Peon did
at times, with an air of amused and affectionate tolerance. I used to
hunt through his small personality for the spark of fun I was sure lay
hidden there, and as the years passed I caught the glint of it more and
more frequently; but it was really Caro who brought it out into the
open, and set it, a perpetual signal, in his eyes.

I found it easy to awaken in him my own love of outdoors, and together
we made friends with such birds as could be enticed to our shady yard in
the city’s outer circle. We were sworn comrades in our enmity to the
English sparrows, and the bond of a common foe was one of the many
things that drew us into a fellowship unusually close. The Peon used to
say that no boy came to genuine manhood without something in the way of
an evil to hate and to fight; and for my part I joyfully set up the
English sparrows as the embodiment of all wickedness, to be destroyed
beak and tail. My own objections to them were the result of long
watching; but David’s hatred sprang to life full-fledged the morning we
found four of the wretched bullies fighting one small chickadee, which
hung head downward from a twig of privet, his eyes shut tight, his claws
clenched, and his throat and breast exposed to his enemies’ vicious
bills. I think some deep thirst for justice seized the child’s soul at
sight of the helpless victim, and ever since he has been mindful of weak
things in a way surprising in a boy so ruggedly strong.

He has been wonderfully mindful of me, always. Long before we left the
city I had learned to enjoy outdoors from a cot under the trees in the
back yard. The pain which was to be by turns my companion, my jailer,
and my emancipator had already laid upon me an iron hand. I was up and
about when the Peon was at home; but when he came in unexpectedly he
learned to look for me under the drooping silver maples in the yard; and
my old-time love of birds was an easy explanation of the many-cushioned
cot and the long hours I daily spent upon it.

David filled the birds’ drinking fountain for me when he came home to
leave his books and get his bat or his football; and I would lie there,
watching my visitors, wondering at the variety of birds to be seen in a
city yard, and wishing the sparrows’ duels were less on the harmless
French order. They never fought because they needed to do it; it was
always for something perfectly futile and foolish. They would leave all
the food I could scatter to tear one crumb from a neighbor. For it is
English sparrow nature never to be satisfied with what they have, to
want only what some one else is enjoying, and to get it for themselves
if they can. David and I were fully agreed that if anything more hateful
was ever created we wished to be spared acquaintance with it.




                                   II
                              BIRD CORNERS


IT is to Uncle Milton that I owe our return to the country, and all the
delights of Bird Corners.

Uncle Milton is an inheritance from my great-aunts and Cedarhurst, where
he had the finest flowers and the most flourishing vegetable garden in
the country. He is a lean old Negro, tall, and straight as a pine. His
features are finely cut; and with his gray hair, long gray moustache,
regular features, and skin like polished bronze, he makes a
distinguished appearance, even in his old blue jeans. He is a real lover
of the outdoor world, and the earth and the plants know it. He bends
over the flower-beds lovingly, with eyes that see, not dirt, but all
dirt’s possibilities of beauty and life. There is never a plant set
carelessly nor a seed that falls by chance. No wonder all he touches
grows!

That he went to town with Great-aunt Letitia, and stayed there afterward
with me, spoke eloquently of the strength of affection between us. But
after my great-aunt’s death he did not accept the situation without
constant protests, and the advice which my youth and ignorance demanded.

“You ain’t got no mo’ business in de city dan I is, Miss Lil,” he said
spring after spring, as I sat on the grass by the flower-beds and
watched his fork go in and out like clock-work, leaving behind it long
rows of fresh-turned earth. “You done los’ all dem roses you had in yo’
face at home. Ef Miss Ferginny done lived she wouldn’ put up wid dis
foolishness not er minute.”

“But the city is more convenient for Mr. Bird,” I would explain. “Some
day when he is rich enough he expects to give up business, and then we
will go back.”

“He’ll be givin’ up his wife fus’ news you know,” growled the old man,
stopping to thin the thick border of violets. “An’ he’ll be goin’ to
bury you dar by Miss Ferginny and Miss ’Titia befo’ he goes retirin’
from business ef he don’ look out. We-all got er plenty ter live on
now—you got er plenty widout his’n; en ef you ain’t, I kin make er
plenty outen dat groun’. Hit’s de riches’ lan’ in Davis’son county. I
made hit pay befo’, en I kin do hit agin, stidder was’in’ it on po’
white-trash renters like you all do. But I ’clare to gracious, Miss Lil,
ef you-all don’ go, I will. I been mixin’ up wid town niggers till I’m
plumb wo’ out wid ’em. Dis is de las’ spring Milton’ll fix yo’ flowers
in dis mizzable little cramped-up lot.”

He had said this so often that I regarded it as one of Nature’s regular
spring processes; and beyond a sudden deeper stirring of my constant
homesickness, his threats passed unnoticed. But one February morning he
came out and stood by my cot under the trees with a face at once elated
and downcast.

“Are you going to begin the spring work today?” I asked in delight.

He looked embarrassed.

“Hit’s sorter early to rake dem leaves offen de beds yit,” he said. Then
he hesitated. “I ’spec I ain’t gwinter be able ter do de wuk no mo’.”

“Are you sick?” I asked anxiously. Then I saw the new look in his face,
and gasped. “You’re going to the country!” I cried.

“Yassum, I is. I can’t stan’ it yere no longer, Miss Lil: I’m er gittin’
too ole fer town; I des bleeged ter go out whar God made de worl’ en
breathe free en be er man ergin, befo’ I die.”

The years had slipped from him like a cloak. I looked at him
enviously—just as an English sparrow might look at some bird of
stronger flight, I reflected suddenly, and scowled at one of my greedy
kinsman in the walk, trying to gobble all the best crumbs at once.

“I’m glad for you,” I said honestly. “When do you go?”

“When my mont’s out. But I hates ter go, Miss Lil.”

“What am I to do here?” I demanded, the sparrow in me refusing to be
quenched altogether.

“I’ll do de bes’ I kin,” he said. “I been lookin’ roun’ fer you all
winter. But dese town niggers is a onery set, fer sho’. When you-all
comes home Milton’s comin’ back.”

“Never mind,” I said; “we’ll manage somehow.”

I closed my eyes because they were getting full of tears. He moved away,
and I let the tears come. I wanted the country, too; and more and more
as my illness grew, and it became increasingly difficult to take my part
in the busy city life. The more one’s bodily freedom is restricted by
weakness and pain, the more one longs for the unconfined spaces of earth
and air, for wide horizons and sweeping winds, and wings that flash far
up into the sunshine, above the shadows where one must lie, conning the
hard lesson of patient idleness. And I wanted Uncle Milton—the visible
link between me and that dear world of hill and sky for which I longed.
Return to it seemed so bright a possibility while another heart, even
this old Negro’s, held it as dear as I. If he went from me he would
leave my hope bereft. I lay with closed eyes, absorbed in longing for
that dear receding vision of delight.

“Don’ you see how bad she wanter go, Marse John?” said Uncle Milton
again, close beside me. I sprang up in amazement, to find him and the
Peon by my cot. “She ain’t gwine ter say a word ef she think hit’ll
discommerdate you; but de chile’s e’en erbout breakin’ her heart fer de
country, same as I is.”

“Uncle Milton,” I began indignantly; but the old man brushed my words
aside.

“You en Marse John fight hit out, honey,” he said. “Mek ’er tell de
trufe, Marse John. Hit’s you en her fer it now; Milton’s done his bes’.”

He turned deliberately and walked out of the yard.

It did not take the Peon long to get the facts, to answer all my
objections as to the inconvenience to himself, and to settle finally our
immediate return. We would rebuild Cedarhurst at once.

“Oh, no,” I cried, “not Cedarhurst! Let us build our own home, all
sunshine and out-of-doors! It isn’t the old house that I love; it was
too cold and stately and dark—such an indoors kind of house. It’s the
hills I’m homesick for, and the sky, and the biggest maple, and the
pasture, and the sycamores down by the brook.”

“But we can’t sleep in the maple,” objected the Peon, “nor eat in the
pasture when it rains. There must be a house.”

“Oh, of course. But let it be our house—not Great-aunt Virginia’s. You
may really build it any way you please if only you will have porches
enough, and so many windows that wherever you sit you can lift your eyes
and look right out, miles and miles and miles. And I’d like all the
rooms to have a southern exposure, of course, on account of the breeze
and the sun, and east windows for winter mornings, and west windows for
the sunsets. I don’t care about the rest.”

“I insist upon bath-rooms and a kitchen,” said the Peon; “mere scenery
is not a sufficient sanitary basis for life. But what shall we call
it—Cedarhurst?”

“Oh, no! Just a plain, every day, home-y name—something that belongs to
us and the birds. Why, we’re Birds ourselves, Peon, dear. Let’s be
sociable and call it Bird Corners.”

“But there aren’t any corners,” said the practical Peon; “the place lies
straight along the pike.”

That is a man’s way. He thinks he must face facts and shape his course
accordingly, poor slave to the visible that he is. But a woman conquers
facts by turning her back upon them, and playing they are something
else.

“The birds will make the corners,” I explained patiently. “Before I’ve
been putting out crumbs a month there’ll be bird pikes cutting through
the place at every conceivable angle, and crossing each other under that
seven-trunked maple where my cot will be. And if that won’t be bird
corners, what will?”

So we prepared for our homing flight. Uncle Milton went out at once to
trim the trees and prune the shrubbery and vines; and the occasional
days he bestowed on us in town were full of delight for me, filled as
they were with reports of progress at home. For it was home, before dirt
had been broken for the house; the city dwelling was a mere temporary
shelter.

“De jonquils out home is showin’ up fine,” he announced one morning in
mid-February; “hit’s time to sorter stir up dese yere lazy town flowers.
En I’ll trim de trees, too, seein’ I’m ’bout done wid ’em out home. I
’spec de city folks what’ll live yere atter we-all gone’ll want what
little dab er trees dey got in dis yard.”

He looked scornfully at the back yard, generous in size, after the
fashion of our Southern cities, and shaded with fine old trees. But a
little later, high in the hackberry, his love of all earth-rooted things
swept contempt from his heart, and his dark old face shone with
happiness as he wielded the hatchet with rhythmic strokes.

That is always the beginning of the spring work—the severance of death
from life, that life may rise again, even out of death. Where would life
draw this dead matter next? To darkness first, to growth most surely,
and perchance, some day, to wings. And the dark old man with the happy
face was servitor of life—life for the dead as for the living; for
death is but the underside of life.

                 *        *        *        *        *

We went home early in May. The house would not be finished until
October; but outdoors was all ready for us, and we could not waste the
summer for lack of a house.

“You know,” I argued to the Peon, “we had a beautiful time in the
mountains last summer; and we slept in a two-roomed cottage with only
weather-boarding between us and the trees outside. Why can’t we have a
shed with a gasoline stove, and a couple of tents to live in?”

So we had them. The Peon and David drove in to Chatterton daily and took
the train for business and school; and I fed the birds and followed
Uncle Milton, and drank in the changing beauties of earth and sky. And
all summer we watched our home grow, from cellar to roof-tree, till it
became a thing complete, and fitted into the landscape for which it was
designed.

We set it on the old home’s hill, which overlooked the countryside, and
faced it toward the sunrising. The dark lines of cedars which had
bordered the approach to the old house were left at one side, and the
road, curving from their upper end, swept into full sunshine and passed
under a great beech, which spread its tiers of leaves above the doorway.
It is an unpretentious house, rambling about pretty much as it pleases
in its efforts to give southern and eastern and western exposures to all
the rooms. Porches are everywhere, and the windows either open on them,
like doors, or stop a little above the floor at low, cushioned seats,
which tempt one to sink down and wonder once again at the beauty of this
fair country of middle Tennessee. There are no curtains at the windows,
nor mats of vines outside. But up the widely-separated columns of the
porches run clematis and jasmines which cross the great openings in
narrow bands, above and below. So all summer the fretwork of green
leaves frames the landscape, a perfect, yet everchanging picture in each
of the wide spaces. The east end of the living-room is of glass, and my
flowers flourish there in winter time. In my own room the bed stands in
a deep recess formed all of windows on the three sides. A low seat runs
under them within reach of the bed. All through the dark, sleepless
night I can lie there and watch for the first paling of the eastern sky,
and follow the level light as it moves softly along the southern hills,
creating the shadows which make the light so clear.

It must be confessed that some of the kin at Chatterton thought my wits
astray that first summer, and the Peon but a soft-headed, poor-spirited
creature for giving way to my whimsies. Camping out was not as popular
then as it is now; and the older members of the family did not hesitate
to commiserate the Peon and David. That they professed to enjoy our long
picnic only added to the heinousness of my folly.

Cousin Chadwell Grackle and his wife were among my first callers. Cousin
Chad is always to the front when anything new crops up in the family. He
has cried the sins and shortcomings of the whole usual order so long
that even he is half bored with them, and the prospect of something new
to criticise whets his social appetite to the keenest possible edge.
Cousin Jane is his reflection and echo. If she were not, even her stolid
nerves could scarcely have endured his painful type of piety without
disaster.

They drove up one sunshiny morning, after they had seen the Peon and
David pass on their way to town. I was on the cot under the biggest
maple. Its seven trunks fall apart like long-stemmed flowers in a vase,
spreading into a great green tent whose leafy curtains droop in a circle
full seventy feet across.

The blackbirds were my principal guests that morning, a sanctimonious
crew in sleek black coats, solemn, censorious, and self-satisfied to the
last degree. All birds which walk instead of hopping are
awkward-looking; but none are as preposterous as the blackbirds, because
none of them put on such sanctified airs. As they moved about this
morning, their heads thrust meekly forward, ducking modestly as they
stepped, they appeared to be meditating on their neighbors’ sins. But
they had their tribe’s keen eye for the main chance, and it was a swift
bird and a wary one which secured a big crumb with these feathered
Chadbands in the yard.

I looked up at the sound of wheels and nearly choked with swallowing my
laughter. Cousin Chad and Cousin Jane did look so sleek and proper, that
as I rose to meet them I could not refrain from throwing some extra
crumbs on the grass for possible additions to my breakfasting guests.

They descended ponderously and looked at me with the apprehensive
scrutiny one might bestow on a lunatic who is liable to break out
immediately in a fresh place.

“How are you, Lyddy?” inquired Cousin Jane, with sepulchral anxiety.
Cousin Chad, busy with the hitching-post, listened with his back as well
as with his ears. They both know perfectly that I have always been Lil
to everyone except the great-aunts, and that Lyddy has been an
abomination to the entire family connection, and especially to me, since
they first invented it in my childhood. That is why they stick to it.
They believe in chastenings, do my cousins, the Grackles—particularly
when they are the chasteners.

“I’m perfectly well,” I answered, with added emphasis to my usual
formula. “Come and sit down. There’s no need to ask how you and Cousin
Chad are; you look the picture of health.”

“Appearances don’t do to go by, Lyddy,” she answered solemnly, sinking
ponderously on a creaking campstool. “Chadwell’s been havin’ sciatica,
and I’ve stayed awake nights with him till I’m just about worn out. But
I’ve never made my afflictions an excuse for shirkin’ my duty. We came
over to say that as you seem to be without a roof over your heads we’d
take you to board till your house is finished—if it ever is.”

She glanced contemptuously at the amorphous piles of building material
just beyond us.

“You can have the second spare bed-room upstairs,” put in Cousin Chad.
“It’s more to my interest to put you in the front one; but livin’ comes
high any way you take it, and I want to consider you. I reckon John
ain’t able to spend much, with all this building on hand. The back
room’s small, but you three can make out in it. If you want the other,
of course it will cost more. You can come over this evening after John
gets home, and he and I can settle the terms after supper.”

I kept my face quite straight, and made a handsome contribution to
current fiction.

“It’s so kind of you. John will appreciate it as much as I. But we
really enjoy camping, and would not give it up even for those lovely
rooms of yours, Cousin Chad. Thank you so much.”

Cousin Jane’s rubicund complexion assumed a purplish hue.

“Do you intend to kill that delicate child of Henry Bird’s, making him
sleep out in the weather all summer?” she demanded.

“No,” I said, considering; “I don’t intend to kill him, exactly. And he
isn’t at all delicate.”

“Well, he will be by the time you get through with him—if he ain’t
dead,” broke in Cousin Chad. “Lyddy, it’s my duty to speak plainly, and
I’ll not shirk it. Letitia spoiled you from the time you were born, and
John Bird seems bent on keeping it up. David will pay the penalty for
it. We do a very different part by the orphan the Lord made it our duty
to take charge of, I can assure you. Caroline Wrenn’s health is taken
care of, with a view to her future usefulness as a Christian. But of
course you’ll stick to your own ways.—Well, I’ve warned you: my
conscience is clear. Come, Jane: we’d better be going.”

“I’m glad your conscience is clear, Cousin Chad. I know that’s a comfort
to you, if I’m not. But we can be good friends, can’t we, even though
our ideas are different?”

“I shall not turn my back upon you if you’re in trouble, Lyddy, if
that’s what you mean,” he answered. “I hope I know my duty better than
that. But when you want help again you must ask for it. I don’t intend
to offer it.”

“That’s a bargain, then,” I said; “and we must both remember it.”

Cousin Jane looked at me sharply, but Cousin Chad was already heaving
her into the buggy, and she turned to get a good grip on the side. The
vehicle creaked as she settled in it, and groaned when Cousin Chad sank
beside her.

“Good-bye, Lyddy,” she said. “We’ve done our best. I hope you won’t
regret it.”

This quite upset me, and after the cedars hid them I lay laughing until
the thought of poor little Caro suddenly sobered me. What were they
doing to Billy’s child? I must make friends with Cousin Jane, somehow,
and entice the little thing over to Bird Corners as much as possible.

There was no one else whom our erratic manner of life really
scandalized, except Cousin Jason Blue; and he, as he took occasion to
tell me when he met me out driving one day with Caro, never made a fool
of himself like Chad Grackle by meddling. If a woman wanted to follow
her nature and behave like a lunatic, and her husband chose to allow it,
it was none of his business; so he shrugged his shoulders and passed on.

Cousin Jason and the Grackles are the only kin I have in all Chatterton
whose kinship I would discount if I could; but there is no denying they
belong in the family. Cousin Chad’s father was my grandmother’s third
half-cousin on my father’s side; and Cousin Jason’s mother was Cousin
Lysander Hilliard’s step-daughter by his second marriage: there could
scarcely be anything plainer than that.

And if Cousin Jason had his drawbacks, there are none about his
half-sister, Grace, fifteen years his junior, and, except Ella, the
dearest friend I have. She married George Wood soon after I married the
Peon, and they have a daughter, Milly, about the age of Caro Wrenn.

David took kindly to country life, and to his numerous
cousins-by-marriage. There were plenty of boys among them; and though at
first they resented David’s city ways, their respect for him grew
immensely when they found how far he could bat a ball; and after he had
whipped Bob White in single combat he was admitted to Chatterton boydom
as a comrade in full fellowship. There was no particular reason for his
fighting Bob, so far as we dull grown-ups could discover, except that
Bob was the leader of his set, and a fight was considered the necessary
initiation to membership. As soon as this was made clear to him, David
had painstakingly trodden on Bob’s toes, and the preliminaries were
arranged at once. The boys were excellent friends, before and afterward;
and the Peon would not allow me to discuss the matter with David. They
talked it out in private, and reached some amicable male conclusion of
their own.

Of the girl cousins David was loftily tolerant, excepting Caro Wrenn.
She was five years old the spring we came back to the country, when
David was half-past nine. Her mother had died when she was born, and her
father, Billy Wrenn, had gone to Colorado three years afterward, to die
there of consumption. He made Cousin Chad Caro’s guardian before he
died, knowing, as we all did, Cousin Chad’s remarkable ability in
reaping financial harvests from even the smallest investments; but he
left the child herself with her mother’s sister, Sally Martin, never
dreaming that death would again bereave the little creature of a
mother’s love. Sally died, quite suddenly, less than a year after Billy;
and Cousin Chad and Cousin Jane, intent, as usual, on doing their
impeccable duty, assumed sole care of the little heiress, and installed
her in their own childless and virtuous home.

A more incongruous setting for her could scarcely have been found. She
was a tiny creature, with rose-leaf skin, great hazel eyes, a mop of
red-brown curls, and a mouth where laughter bubbled all day long. Quick
and bird-like in all her movements, she flitted in and out of the most
unexpected recesses in the twinkling of an eye, with endless flutterings
of hands and skirts and sweet gurglings of suppressed laughter. Almost
from her cradle she sang—queer little soft croonings which slipped into
tunes before she could speak their words. Cousin Jane scarcely knew what
to make of her, and was torn between a sincere desire to do her
Spartanly-Christian duty by her, and her solemn puzzlement over what she
considered the child’s combination of depravity and charm. Even Cousin
Jane could not be very severe with her; but she had an uneasy sense of
spoiling her every time she forebore the rod, so that I found her more
than willing to turn the child over to me for the greater part of the
time.

This arrangement gave my revered relative ample warrant for looking
closely into my household affairs and reproving me for everything she
did and didn’t discover; it was her duty to know all about a place where
dear Caroline spent so much of her time. And when Caro departed from
Cousin Jane’s ideals, as she did with every movement of body and mind,
it was a great relief to my pious cousin to be able publicly to disavow
all responsibility for the child’s shortcomings. What, as she constantly
inquired, could one expect of Caroline when that scatter-brained Lyddy
would persist in encouraging the child in her flightiness? She published
abroad her own powerlessness to control either Caro or the situation,
and openly washed her hands of the consequences.

Caro and I bore up as best we could, and the Peon and David stood by us
nobly. David, indeed, was ready to fight his idol’s battles with Cousin
Jane herself. In fact, he grew up with a lack of respect for that
excellent lady which tempted her to assume the role of a prophet, in
which capacity she dwelt at large on the penitentiary as David’s
ultimate place of residence. Caro always responded to these
prognostications that, if Davy went to the penimtentium, she would go,
too, as soon as she was big enough, and keep house for him, and make the
cook give them ice-cream every day that came. And so the matter rested.




                                  III
                            IN MAKE-BELIEVE


IT is four years since I wrote those last words. Not long after, Caro
went away to school. David went North to college that year, and was only
coming home for the regular holidays. He still held to his boyhood
preference, and was determined to be a scientific farmer: and since the
Peon and I were to have him with us always, we wanted him to have a few
years quite away from us in which to make his own adjustments to life.
So they left us the same week, David with all a boy’s love to hold him
back, and a young man’s eagerness to urge him away; and Caro in as
nearly easterly weather as her sunny nature ever experienced.

It was Cousin Jane who first decided on Caro’s banishment. For the sake
of her own peace of mind she had of late years resigned the child almost
entirely to me; but every now and then she had what Caro called a “qualm
spell.” During these painful periods Caro resided with the Grackles,
strictly, not even coming over to take lunch with me. She arose at five
and extinguished her light at nine; and pinned on the wall beside her
bureau, in Cousin Jane’s firm handwriting, was a schedule of useful
occupations for each of the intervening sixteen hours.

She had so much time for devotions, so much for meals, so much for
school, for study, for “domestic occupations,” for “improving and useful
reading,” and for “practical sewing.” Cousin Jane never allowed precious
time wasted on fancy work; and if she thought it was all like the awful
things she had in her parlor I don’t in the least blame her for thinking
it wicked.

However, Caro’s time was laid out for her as exactly as the squares on a
checker-board. She fed the chickens, argued with the old biddies who
wanted to “set” in the wrong place, and wheedled the arrogant old Buff
Orpington, who ruled the hens and Cousin Jane with ease and contempt,
into doing whatever she wanted of him. She made butter that drew
near-smiles to Cousin Jane’s stiff lips, and evolved cakes that called
forth lectures to Cousin Chad on the sin of gluttony. She sewed, without
a murmur, or a particle of trimming, undergarments of good, reliable,
ever-wearing domestic. She was always foresighted enough to make ample
allowance for their shrinking when washed; whereby she both pleased
Cousin Jane and insured an excellent fit for little black Josie when she
returned to us with a halo of virtue above her red-brown curls. She read
history till she could put me to the blush. She washed the best tea-cups
and the Persian cat. She dusted the parlor daily. And from her early
childhood she made irreproachable jam.

It really was excellent training for her; thorough good discipline, as
Cousin Jane would say; especially as it was interspersed with “spells of
Bird-Cornering,” during which she sojourned with the Peon and me. For
the period of discipline always followed an accustomed round. It began
with a Cousin Jane all severity, lynx-eyed to drag poor Caro’s
delinquencies to light and overcome them by unsparing criticism. But
Caro has always made play of everything, finding by the talisman of her
own happy heart the hidden beauty, or laughter, of the ugliest and
solemnest things. She did all Cousin Jane found for her to do—which is
saying a good deal—not only cheerfully, but with whole-souled delight,
as if it were her very meat and drink. Doing it that way, she did it
beyond criticism; and Cousin Jane would begin to relax, unwillingly,
unable to find a flaw, yet with an uneasy feeling that something must be
wrong, or Caro couldn’t possibly be enjoying herself so much. When she
set herself to mortify Caro’s girlish vanity the child met her more than
half-way. She did her best to “slick” her curls, and donned shapeless
gingham aprons as joyously as though they were made of jewels and lace.
Cousin Jane would find herself being mollified to the point of
indulgence in spite of herself; and about that time Caro would come
flying into the yard at Bird Corners and drop fluttering beside me, her
eyes shining with the pure joy of living and the love of living things.

“I’m back again, Mammy Lil,” she would laugh, whirling about on one toe.
“Cousin Jane hasn’t scolded me for four days, and yesterday she almost
patted my head; so I knew she thought I’d had training enough for the
present, and I’d be coming back home in a jiffy. They’re so good to me
in their funny way I’m most ashamed to be glad to come home to you—but
I am, all the same. Where’s Josie? I’ve made three new petticoats and a
night gown for her, out of muslin strong enough to climb trees.”

The truth was that when Caro came back to me it was because Cousin Jane
had detected in her own soul symptoms of the child’s being made an idol:
she had to get rid of her to recover her own moral poise. But she still
intended to do her full duty by her: so when Caro was fifteen she was
sent to boarding school, to remain at least five years. By that time
Cousin Jane hoped to have re-established her own imperturbability
without unduly exposing her charge to the dangerous influences of Bird
Corners.

We had a battle royal concerning the school she should go to, and to
this day Cousin Jane thinks she won. She really has no more idea about
schools than a chinquapin worm, living fat and contented in its own
sufficient little world; and I knew she’d be for sending the child to
some fifth-rate country “college” where she’d be taught poor music and
worse French, and be worked to death learning things the way they
aren’t. So I wrote, ostentatiously, for the catalogue of one of the most
exclusive, nonsensical, and extravagant “finishing schools”; and
privately ordered sent to Cousin Jane one from the school I wished Caro
to attend. It was a sensible place where she’d be taken care of, and
given a chance to grow up to the best of herself in body and mind. I
plead for the finishing school, and sniffed diligently at the other,
even advocating the dreaded “college” as preferable; whereby I had the
comfort of having Caro sent where I wanted her, with Cousin Jane’s mind
so definitely set on keeping her there that I knew her education was
provided for.

Caro rebelled against going. For the first time in her life she did not
want to please us.

“You’re not well enough to do without me and David, too, Mammy Lil,” she
insisted; “it’s just a pretense that you don’t need me; and I don’t care
whether I’m educated or not.”

She yielded to the inevitable between tears and laughter.

“Anyway,” she reflected, “there’s Make-Believe left: you’ll never get
rid of me there, will you? I’ll come there every day of the world, and
David, too: and ten times a day if you want me.”

It was a genuine relief to have her go; it was becoming most difficult
to blind her bright eyes to my illness. It was much simpler to keep up
appearances with the Peon, who left home early and returned late, and
who was often called away for days together. If I sat up as usual when
he was in the house it was becoming necessary to lie quite still all
day.

For weeks after the children left I enjoyed being alone, and the freedom
from effort which it brought. But as the winter wore on, the loneliness
proved a lure to introspection and self-pity—those quicksands of
despair which encircle the country of enforced idleness; and as I lay
under my windows or beneath the trees I began, for pleasure and
companionship, to write the story of our happy life and of the
children’s growing up. But the note-book proved desperately heavy, and
the few pages I filled took weeks instead of days; until at last I
ceased the effort until I should be stronger, as I had ceased so many
other things in this journeying into the Land of Idleness.

I made a new acquaintance that winter—a wretched little blue devil to
whom I gave the name of Grumpy, and with whom I battled from morning
till night, and especially from night till morning. It is not pain that
blue devils thrive on—I had proved that all these many years; it is
idleness that gives them their chance for mischief—the helpless
idleness of utter exhaustion, when one’s thoughts hang vacant, and body
nor mind can longer force its way past the wall of pain to move, however
slowly, in the beautiful outside world of human effort and achievement.

So Grumpy came to Bird Corners. Satan himself knows no self-respecting
devil would have stayed on the premises after the way I treated the
creature; but blue devils respect neither themselves nor anybody else.
An hour after I had flung him out by the heels he would bob up by the
sofa in the finest fettle imaginable, grinning at my exhaustion from our
late encounter. The most I ever could be sure of doing was keeping him
invisible to every one else; but he made up for that in the nights.
Still, one adjusts one’s self to the inevitable in time; and blue devils
are all in the day’s work, I suppose, like the dentist or a cold in
one’s head. One gets through with the visitation somehow, and laughs
afterward because, for the time, at least, it is over.

When the children came home in the summer there was trouble, of course.
Doctors came and went, though I had privately done my full duty by them
long before; and I swallowed a deal of nasty stuff which did absolutely
no good, except that it soothed the feelings of the family.

By the end of the summer David was insisting on something radical; and
when he went back to college he took me with him, and deposited me in a
northern sanitarium, where I was to lie flat on my back three months,
and be made over as good as new.

This was not only radical, but revolutionary. Chatterton had never
before furnished an inmate for a sanitarium. The word, indeed, was
commonly understood as a polite euphemism for a lunatic asylum. The
sentiments of the kin ranged all the way from Grace Wood’s anxious
hopefulness to Cousin Jane’s frank curiosity concerning what new kind of
craziness Lyddy had been up to now, to make John Bird feel like she had
to be shut up in a private mad-house. She took my part, however, so far
as to say, both to my face and behind my back, that I wasn’t a mite
crazier than I’d been all my life; and if folks could get along with me
this long it did look like a pity they couldn’t put up with me a while
longer, and save disgracing the family. There was nothing the matter
with me, Cousin Jane opined, beyond being spoiled to death, and lazy;
and, anyway, it was flying in the face of Providence to go on living if
your time had come to die.

As to going North, she never did believe in wasting money on conceited
Yankee doctors when there were so many struggling physicians at home, to
say nothing of the heathen in foreign lands who were dropping into
hell-fire so many a minute for lack of any kind of doctors, good or bad,
to keep them alive until the missionaries could get to them.

“But it’s no use preachin’ to selfish ears,” she concluded, drawing her
heavy silk wrap about her ample shoulders and settling her bonnet
strings. “I’ve been wastin’ my breath, of course.”

It seemed a pity that she should, whether from my point of view or her
own; so I smiled as sympathetically as I could, and offered my cheek for
her farewell salute. She bestowed it impressively.

“Well, good-bye, Lyddy. I suppose I won’t see you again in this life;
an’ in the other one failin’ wits won’t trouble us, I trust. I want you
to know I don’t hold any of your foolishness against you, child: I
reckon you never did have sense like the rest of us.”

She went out with her ponderous, firm tread, and Caro flitted to my
side, her head thrown up, ruffling like an angry wren.

“Mammy Lil, its a shame you made me promise to be good! Do let me run
after her and——” She caught my eye and broke into bubbling laughter,
dropping her head on my pillows and snuggling her little nose under my
chin.

“Of course it’s funny,” she admitted presently; “and if you will laugh,
I have to. But I can’t see how she can be so wooden-headed and yet be
alive.”

“She isn’t alive very much, poor soul!” I answered, soberly enough. “I
don’t think anybody really lives except so far as they understand
life—and people. When you think of it in that way, Cousin Jane has
lived in a closer confinement all her life than I’ll be when I get to
the asylum.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

That was three years ago, and more, and I am here at the sanitarium yet,
though the Peon is coming to take me home next month. It was I who set
the limit of my stay at three months, when I came; I was determined to
be well by that time. I even had Caro put my note-book in my trunk,
because I expected to fill it before I came back. That is why I am
writing this chapter, a few lines at a time, on good days: I am
determined to do something that I planned doing, before I go back.

It would take more note-books than my trunk could hold to tell the story
of the kindness shown me here; of the patience, skill, and
resourcefulness which have fought for me when I could no longer fight
for myself. And it is good to be in a place like this for awhile, to
learn what human nature is capable of under racking, tearing strain. The
courage one finds, the high-hearted endurance of plain, ordinary people,
the brave good cheer of men and women whose pain-lined faces choke one’s
throat with tears! I have seen these things so often these last eighteen
months—or at least in so much of them as I could be carried, lying flat
in a wheeled-chair, out on one of the balconies, where I could catch
glimpses of the struggles that were going on around me.

It is not all loss, this suffering. Sickness does bring out hidden
ugliness and weakness, for it searches soul and body to the inmost core.
But there is more good hidden than there is evil; and in the stress of
suffering the most ordinary people blossom into a loveliness of soul
which reveals them as of the company of the saints. Life is so narrow
and commonplace to the average experience that it can only make a narrow
and commonplace appeal. “The trivial round, the common task” has, for so
many, no large connections; and the depths of their natures are never
stirred until their every-day world lies in ruins about them, and to
live at all they must discover new resources in

    “—_that true world within the world we see_,”

and gain a true perspective and a new horizon.

And the funny folk in a place like this—they would fill volumes, too!
Of course they are pitiful; but I never could see the harm of laughter
over pitifulness, if only one doesn’t laugh unkindly. For some of them
never find new resources. Disaster leads them, not to discovery, but to
an _impasse_; and they revenge themselves on the inexplicable by endless
incongruities of thought and action.

The patient who really helped me most was a dear old lady who, though
forbidden, like the rest, to talk to me, felt it her heaven-sent mission
to cheer me up. Whenever she saw me deposited on the porch she flew out,
wringing her hands in sympathy, and exclaiming, “Oh, _what_ is life
without health!” It really is a good deal when you come to think of it;
and the old lady’s reiterations elicited a string of mental replies as
long as from western New York to Bird Corners, and kept me in ammunition
for Grumpy.

For Grumpy has been at this sanitarium for three years and seven weeks.
But the Peon has been here, too, and David—and Cousin Jane! Caro I have
not seen in all these years: Cousin Jane doesn’t consider it decent for
a young girl to be allowed in a place where women may be seen in the
halls in kimonos, and men are allowed to sit in wheeled-chairs on the
balconies, shamelessly clad in their bath robes, with heaven knows what
garments, or lack of garments, underneath. Caro should not set foot in
the place; and no entreaties could move her. But Caro has written, every
week of the world; and, to make up for my not having her, Cousin Jane
paid me a visit herself. She felt it her duty, she said, to find out
what kind of a place it was that John Bird had shut Lyddy up in; and if
the rest of the family wouldn’t look after me, she would. So she came,
suspicious and inquisitorial, and melted visibly under the tactful
suavity of the physician in charge,—“the Head,” as we called him. She
even began to help him, ministering to the patients after a fashion all
her own. She had it out with one of them, a metaphysical lady, a very
unorthodox person, and left her in a state of collapse. In no uncertain
tones she expressed her views on hen-pecking to another, an elderly lady
with a liver and a youthful husband. I don’t know what would have
happened further if I had not been inspired to beguile her into going
down into the treatment rooms for a Turkish bath. She came up purple
with wrath, and began to pack her trunk, declaring that she washed her
hands of the place forever; and if I wanted to stay there and have my
morals corrupted, I could; but for her part she was going back to her
own bathtub, and the religion she was brought up in. And go she did,
that night.

For myself, these three years must remain in the silence in which they
have been spent. The pain I wish to forget; today’s pain is enough. And
the helplessness and idleness, so much worse than the pain—that too, I
would shut from my memory. But the kindness which has filled these
years—that is an eternal possession. And the loveliness of this little
valley is mine always, cut off as it is in my thoughts as a place apart
from all my real world and life, shut in and hidden by its beautiful
circling hills. I have called it the Enchanted Valley, because it seemed
sometimes as if some spell had caught and bound me to it forever. But
now that I am to go free at last I can forget all that, and remember
only the enchantment of its beauty, and the kindness of those who dwell
in it. The Land of Make-Believe, too, is as near me as under the trees
at home. I have had beautiful times in Make-Believe, day and night, and
especially at night. I have seen Caro there, you may be sure! I made a
jingle about it not long ago which tells the real story of these long
years better than anything else I could write.

              _IN MAKE-BELIEVE_

    _Oh, beautiful country of Make-Believe,_
      _Where in childhood I learned to play!_
    _I’m not bound fast to a bed—not I!_
    _Nor racked with pain till I want to cry:_
      _I’m over the hills and away!_

    _Poor body that lies here and cannot sleep,_
      _I’m sorry to leave you so;_
    _But the children are calling from far away;_
    _In Make-Believe, where it’s time to play,_
      _And you can’t walk, you know._

    _I fly on the wings of thought, myself,_
      _While the wind shrieks behind me “Wait!”_
    _For he never can fly as fast as thought,_
    _And, he howls because he thinks he ought;—_
      _But here I am at the gate._

    _No narrow, smothering walls for me,_
      _Nor life shut in from the sky,_
    _When Make-Believe is all outdoors,_
    _With beautiful grass instead of floors,_
      _And to reach it one needs but try._

    _There is ice back there; but in Make-Believe_
      _There’s just what you happen to choose:_
    _Soft spring-time colors with silver sheen,_
    _Or cool wood-reaches of summer green,_
      _Or the sparkle of autumn dews._

    _Oh, the woodland rambles in Make-Believe!_
      _The fields where daisies grow!_
    _The level light on the evening hills,_
    _The wild bird-song that leaps and thrills,_
      _And the rose of the sunset’s glow!_

    _How the children chatter in Make-Believe,_
      _Just as at home they do!_
    _How close they cuddle, with laugh and kiss,_
    _To tell their secrets, nor ever miss_
      _Aught else if they have but you!_

    _All the people you love are in Make-Believe,_
      _The living, and those called dead;_
    _And all the people you’d like to know—_
    _The wise of the earth, both high and low,_
      _And the heroes of days long fled._

    _And they know what’s worth while in Make-Believe_
      _That to give is the blessed way;_
    _That courage, and laughter, and love, are wise;_
    _That the sun shines back of the cloudiest skies;_
      _That there’s end to the longest day._

    _They talk of high things in Make-Believe,_
      _And they love e’en the tiniest joke_
    _And they take you sailing o’er land and sea;_
    _And they’d know all the places you’d like to be_
      _If never a word you spoke._

    _But the sun is up in that wintry world;_
      _And the nurse will put in her head_
    _And ask, “Is the pain any better, my dear?_
    _Did you sleep a little? The doctor’s here.”—_
      _Well, so am I here——in bed!_

And now it is mid-November, for the weeks have passed by as I lay here,
writing a bit as I could; and I am to be home Thanksgiving morning; not
home in Make-Believe, but home in real Bird Corners, down in Tennessee!
David is there, for good, now, running the farm as he planned, but
helping the Peon in his office, too; and Caro is coming home for
Christmas, and to stay “forever,” she says, in June; and I am to get
well—some day—at home. I can walk quite a little already—twenty yards
sometimes; and the bad days are better than they used to be, and farther
apart. Even Grumpy must admit that good bad days are encouraging!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_All_ the people you love in Make-Believe? Not quite all—not Ella.
Somehow I can’t look for her there any more; not since the day the
letter came back unopened. We were together in Make-Believe always
before that. But when I see her again it will be when Make-Believe will
have disappeared, with the world we see, and the real world will be
plain to sight. But everybody else was there—even pious, pompous Cousin
Chad, and foolish, kind-hearted, exasperating Cousin Jane.

And now it’s day after tomorrow, and the Peon is coming in four days!




                                   IV
                          THE DARK O’ THE YEAR


_November 30th._ The deepest joys can never be put into words; but lying
here in my own dear room, close under the long windows which form its
eastern side, and looking out across the valley to the familiar hills
beyond, I know there is one spot on the map more beautiful than anything
Make-Believe can show. The Peon and David left me only an hour ago—the
real ones, I mean; and out on the lawn Uncle Milton is pretending to
rake invisible leaves, looking towards my windows every few minutes to
assure himself that I am really here.

Near the wall of honeysuckle along the pasture fence the cardinal and
his wife are flitting about, just as I left them three years ago; and in
the lilac outside my window, where all the spring-time beauty sleeps
safe in the sheltering buds, a Carolina wren proclaims the triumph of
days to come. His spring song is a bubbling rhapsody of present love and
delight; but his winter song is vibrant with the joy of things unseen.
He sings as one who carries spring in his heart always, as vivid a
reality in December as when all the woods are green. To doubts,
questions and hopes he has one answer, and he gives it joyously under
the darkest skies. Will earth awake again? Will sunshine come? Will life
reign in evident triumph, and winter and darkness pass? _Sur-e-ly,
sur-e-ly, sur-e-ly, sure!_ The rich notes thrill with the joy of
assurance, and shake him bodily as he stands with up-thrown head and
pulsing throat, wagging from beak to tail.

But like many another of the sons of the prophets, his gift of open
vision lies close to his love of fun. His tail jerks with a wildness
suggestive of broken gearings in his little insides, as he dashes into
his score again _accelerando_, singing it _da capo_ with a comical
exaggeration of his former style. _Sure-ly, sure-ly, sure-ly, sure!_ He
cocks his head, flirts his tail, gives me a sharp look from his sharper
eye, and whisks around the house in a twinkling.

And Grace Wood is coming to see me tomorrow! I have been good and waited
until I am quite rested, and now I am to have my reward. But I did not
know until I came home that George died two years ago. There were never
two people happier together than they; and yet she has gone on writing
to me all this time, the same sunshiny, hopeful, heartening letters she
sent me when I first left home. That was always Grace’s way; everything
that came to her, hurt or pleasure, went out from her again only as help
to somebody who needed it.

I haven’t seen Cousin Jane yet, and David says she’s been simmering for
days and is liable to boil over any minute. She came an hour after I
reached home, though requested to stay away until I sent for her; but
the Peon caught her at my door and turned her back. She insisted she had
something of the greatest importance to explain to me; but the Peon is
an awesome person when he does lay down the law, and she hasn’t been
back since. I can’t help wondering if it is something about Caro—though
it can’t be, for I’ve been Caro’s “mother-confessor” too long to be
learning anything about her from Cousin Jane. Besides, Caro will be here
herself in three more weeks—after all these years and years!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_December 9th._ Grace came, her old dear self, unchanged except that the
look of detachment from herself was deepened in her clear, sweet eyes,
and about her smiling, tender mouth.

We spoke of George as if he were still with her—as indeed I think he
is—and of Milly, now quite grown, and sharing with Caro the honors of
Chatterton belledom.

We had a beautiful time together, and chatted and giggled as we have
done these forty years whenever occasion offered; and she went away
promising to come soon again if I would keep on getting better. And so I
would have done but for Cousin Jane. She was driving down the pike and
saw Grace, with her own eyes, coming through the gate. She drove on down
the road a bit till Grace was out of sight, and then swooped down on me
like a blackbird on a worm. Josie tried to stop her at the front door;
but she had known Josie from her pickaninny days; and if she hadn’t, it
wouldn’t have mattered, for Cousin Jane is not a person to be frustrated
by darkies.

She knocked once, sepulchrally, on my door, and opened it on the
instant. She wore her best Sunday air, and eyed me like a familiar of
the Holy Office about to put a heretic through a course of sprouts.

                 *        *        *        *        *

“Well, Lyddy,” she began, settling weightily into Grace’s chair, “so you
lived to get back home, after all. I hope you’re as grateful to
Providence as you ought to be.”

Her tone made it evident that, though she might hope it, she certainly
didn’t expect it.

“You’ve gone off mightily in your looks,” she continued; “not that you
weren’t always sorter peaked an’ skinny-lookin’—‘slender,’ Letitia used
to call it! Do you think your mind’s gettin’ straight any?”

“It’s straight, what there is of it,” I said; “but I’m tired just now,
Cousin Jane; I can’t talk very well. You see Grace has been here——”

“Didn’t I see her?” she demanded indignantly. “That’s why I came. If you
can see a chatterer like her, I reckon you can see me. I told John Bird
I wanted to see you about Caroline.”

My tired eyes opened at once.

“What is it?” I asked.

“Caroline is gettin’ grown-up; she was nineteen last June. I’ve tried my
best to keep beaux and foolishness away from her, but everything in
town, looks like, was after her last summer; and the worst of it was,
Caroline liked it.”

The corners of my mouth took an upward curve.

“You wait till I get through, missy, an’ you’ll be laughin’ the other
side of your mouth. Caroline is hail-fellow-well-met with every boy in
this town except David Bird; and she knows perfectly well, for I told
her, that Chadwell and I and you and John Bird intend her to marry
David.”

The room swam round, and I closed my eyes. Speech was impossible.

“Good land, Lyddy! Don’t go to faintin’—I didn’t know you were such a
baby. You needn’t get so scared, child. Jane Grackle is pretty safe to
get her own way, and long as your way’s my way you’ll get yours, too.
She’ll marry him yet; young folks haven’t any sense; they need managin’,
and I——”

“For heaven’s sake don’t try to manage Caro,” I gasped. “And as for
telling her I intended her to marry David—go, before you say something
else that will make forgiveness impossible!”

Cousin Jane turned purple. I saw that as my eyes closed again. She rose
stiffly, with rustling skirts.

“If I didn’t know you’d lost what little sense the Lord gave you, Lyddy
Bird, I’d box your ears for your impudence. I’ll go when I get ready,
miss. I didn’t tell Caroline you _said_ you intended her to marry
David—I know you’ve never said a word about it: I just took it as a
matter of course. Chadwell and I feel it our duty to provide for
her—not in money, of course; she has quite a tidy little fortune of her
own, and of course you and John Bird expect to leave David all you’ve
got; they won’t need anything from us. But we want to see her settled:
an’ David’s steady an’ reliable an’ a real good business boy, for all
you’ve raised him so harum-scarum; an’ it stands to reason, with your
keepin’ Caroline all the time like you did, an’ throwin’ away the good
stout clothes I provided for her to waste your own money in fol-de-rols,
an’ good as adoptin’ her, you might say, that you’d picked her out for
David an’ meant to leave them your money. Don’t you?”

I swept together my floating wits, steadied them with a supreme effort,
and considered for an instant, while I felt Cousin Jane’s angry stare
battering at my closed lids. I must tell her something, and nothing.

“Caro and David are like our own children,” I said weakly; “we want
their happiness, and nothing else. If they love one another as brother
and sister, it’s quite to be expected, don’t you think? Whatever made
you think we wanted a marriage, brought up as they have been?”

“Do you mean you won’t leave them the money?”

“I mean money has nothing to do with it. We expect to do all we can for
them, and to let them be happy in their own ways, not in ours.”

“Well, any way suits Caroline that’s not my way an’ that makes
mischief—I can see that plain enough, an’ I told her so. I scolded her
good. An’ it’s my opinion David’s in love with her. I caught him lookin’
at her one day when they were fishin’ down by the mill, an’ I just
happened to go by in the buggy. I couldn’t get a word out of him when I
asked him about it; an’ when I told him I’d given Caroline a talkin’-to,
an’ I’d set my head on his havin’ her, he glared at me as if I was
tryin’ to murder him, an’ told me to let Caroline alone, an’ let her
marry whoever she wanted to. He ain’t been near me since, an’ won’t
hardly speak to me; an’ Caroline behaved like a spitfire when I went to
her about it. But I believe David’s willin’ if she’d be—but she ain’t,
yet. You may as well know there’s goin’ to be trouble when she comes
home. It ain’t like it used to be; an’ you’d better get up out of that
bed an’ be gettin’ ready to help straighten things out.”

How much longer she would have stayed there I don’t know. Her voice,
near and strident as it was, was drifting off into a world that seemed
far away, when the door opened with soft quickness and David was in the
room.

Before he could speak Cousin Jane was lumbering away, his eyes driving
her like bayonets. He poured out something and held it to my lips, and
then sat stroking my hand as gently as Caro could have done. And for
days and nights I lay here in the clutch of the old weakness and the old
pain, and scarcely heeding either in the blackness of this new fear. I
have been trying for days to write it all down, thinking maybe I could
face it better so, and find some way of deliverance from Cousin Jane’s
cataclysmic diplomacy.

That Caro should marry David! Has there ever been a time when I didn’t
hope for it? And I have never said it, even to the Peon himself, for
fear the very walls should carry the secret and make the hope
impossible: and now! If Jane Grackle—but there’s no use railing; when
one’s hopes are in ruins it takes all one’s strength to face the
disaster; if I waste mine in reproaches I shall turn coward, and then
Grumpy will rule my world.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_December 17th._ Gray days, with sullen skies which will neither shine
nor storm. The mocking-birds have entered their winter silence, and eye
me indifferently as they hop about under my windows picking up the
crumbs which Josie scatters daily for my feathered guests. They never
come together at this time of the year. Each goes his own path in
solitude as well as in silence. But the flickers are more sociable, and
the wrens are always in pairs. The cardinal and his wife come together
every morning, she gently indifferent as usual, and he the devoted lover
of all the year around.

Over in the pasture the meadow-larks sing half-heartedly, and a titmouse
protests sturdily against their sentimental pathos. He is pecking at a
magnolia seed tucked under his toes as he sits in the beech at
breakfast. “_Here! Here! Here! Here!_” he exclaims. He believes in
making the best of things, does the titmouse, and holds his crest as
high these dark, raw days as when he goes courting in a world that is in
gala attire for the occasion.

And if the pain isn’t better yet, the weakness is; and that is always
the worst part of it. I shall be out in my wheeled-chair yet, by the
time Caro comes. And as to Cousin Jane’s nonsense, she may make
mischief—has made it, evidently; but if they’re really made for each
other, as I have hoped for so long, surely an old woman’s foolish tongue
can never ruin their lives. _Sur-e-ly, sur-e-ly, sur-e-ly, sure!_ Oh,
bless the little red-brown seer! He tilts on the lilac bush a second,
winks at me distinctly, and is off with a whisk of his tail which says
plainly, “Don’t be more of a fool than you must be, old pal!” and I
won’t.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_December 24th._ How full of happiness one’s world can be! Caro is not
much bigger than her feathered namesake out of doors, but the place
overflows with her presence.

I was afraid Cousin Jane wouldn’t let her stay here after the late
unpleasantness, and was lying on the south porch the other day, trying
to devise some way to make my peace with her, when she drove around the
house and over the grass, and stopped her buggy close to my chair.

“Oh, Cousin Jane, I’m so glad to see you!” I exclaimed. “I’ve been
wanting to ask you to let Caro come straight to me and stay with us
while she’s at home. I haven’t had her for three years, Cousin Jane; and
I can make it all right with her about David, I’m sure.”

“I knew you could do something if you were a mind to try,” she said,
with her severest kiss-of-peace manner, which always aroused an
unreasonable combativeness in my unregenerate soul. “I am perfectly
willing, Lyddy, to let by-gones be by-gones. I never bear malice, even
against ill-tempered folks. I came over to say if you’d do what you
could with Caroline, I’d let her stay here. She always was keen to
please you—why, I never could see; but she is; and I’ll not let my
personal feelin’s stand in the way when it comes to dischargin’ my duty
to that poor motherless girl. She can come.”

“Thank you, Cousin Jane,” I said heartily.

“You’re welcome, Lyddy, you’re welcome: I don’t hold anything against
you. I want to set you a Christian example: maybe it’ll have some effect
on you, now you’re all broken down with havin’ too much of your own way.
Looks like, with all the afflictions the Lord’s sent on you, an’ old as
you are, you might be learnin’ better.”

I suppose I am a sinner; but somehow, all my life, whenever Cousin Jane
takes her religion in both hands and tries to ram it into me in her best
pile-driver manner, my own scuttles off and dives into the first
rat-hole it can find; and I have a dreadful time dragging it out again
and making it help me behave. So I took a long look at the blackbirds
under the maple, piously jabbing the English sparrows to discourage
their greediness about crumbs, before I said soberly:

“I don’t believe the Lord sent me any afflictions. I think He just tries
to teach me how to get the good out of what comes, and to rise by it. I
think that’s one of His special jobs in this world—trying to turn our
afflictions into wings.”

“Well, we all know you’re sorter half-cracked, Lyddy,” said Cousin Jane,
with a manner intended to be genial. She was evidently bent on not
quarreling. “Just do your best for Caroline.” She gathered up the reins.

“Cousin Jane,” I said quickly, “don’t say a word more to Caro
about—those things. Please.”

“I’ll do as I see fit, Lyddy,” she answered stiffly. “Bein’ willin’ to
let you help don’t mean I can trust you to manage things. Well,
good-bye. Do try to get up an’ take some exercise; it’ll do you good.
I’m a worker, myself, an’ always was; an’ you see how strong I am—not
but what I could complain if I wanted to, like some.” She disappeared
around the house, tucking her buggy-robe closely around her with one
hand as she drove.

So yesterday morning I was out on the front porch, watching the road
with my glasses; and there they came, whirling in from the pike in the
open car, the top being down that I might see her afar off. Caro was
driving, and David beamed beside her, while the Peon beamed on the back
seat.

The whole place feels her presence, and overflows with her music, her
laughter, her sweet and tricksy ways. She is off with the young folks in
Chatterton now, helping with the Christmas tree at the church; but
before she left she wheeled me out to my cot under the maple tree—or
superintended Uncle Milton’s doing it, while she fluttered about with
the pillows, and scolded us for letting her do all the work. She
scattered crumbs for the birds, just as she used to, and then cuddled
down on the same little stool where she used to sit, her curly brown
head on my pillows. Not Make-Believe any more, thank heaven, but Caro,
and the real Bird Corners!

We were silent awhile, and then she began to talk—all the loving
nonsense and little intimate confidences that had always come when we
were alone. But not a word of David, nor of Cousin Jane. I could not let
our first talk begin a silence between us, so I told her what had
happened. She had flushed a little at first, but her laughter bubbled as
she kissed me.

“Sweet Mammy, don’t you think I know Cousin Jane? I knew you never said
it, nor meant it. And I’m sure you’d let me marry the man in the moon,
if I wanted to. I did get mad with her for talking to David—that rather
passed bounds. But David’s a darling, and as sensible as can be. We
thrashed it all out afterwards, and we aren’t going to make ourselves
unhappy because Cousin Jane’s a born donkey and can’t help it. Don’t you
bother about it a minute. We’ll both of us get married some of these
days, and you’ll have four children to love you instead of two.”

“And there isn’t anybody else yet?” I asked, my face turning to hers as
I lay, and her clear eyes looking into mine.

“I don’t think there is with David,” she said, considering; “but as for
me—Mammy Lil, would you rather be a young man’s darling, or marry a
very old and rich and apoplectic gentleman, worry him to death fast, and
be happy and independent forever after?”

“Who is the young man?”

“Oh, anybody; I haven’t decided; but I suppose I could get one. You know
I wrote you about the boys last summer, and how wild Cousin Jane was.
She was more fun than the boys. You don’t really want me to marry, do
you? I’m having such a good time.” She sat up and waved her hand.
“There’s Milly, and I must go. Now, lie here and be good till I get
back, and I’ll never marry anybody you don’t want me to.” And she ran
down to the gate, pinning her hat on as she went.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_December 30th._ Note-books are superfluous when I can have Caro. It is
so good to see one so pretty, so eager, so joyous, so young in body and
soul. She is the very spirit of youth, with her swift, outgoing life,
her quick response to it on all sides, her gay resourcefulness in the
little emergencies of her small world. I forget my body, and all its
pain-worn helplessness, while she dances through the house. It doesn’t
matter so much that I must watch in idleness while the life I love
sweeps by, if somebody else has my own vivid joy in it—a joy unhampered
by weariness or pain. No wonder the girls can’t stir without her, nor
resent it that she draws the boys as honey draws flies.

I can’t see that she cares to draw any one of them yet, though she
dearly loves to draw them all. She is in that kitten stage which comes
to every girl alive. She wants to play, and she finds the new game
fascinating. What the boys find it doesn’t concern her yet; she is
exploring the possibilities of the game.

How David feels toward her is more than I can tell. He is as frankly
fond of her as when he used to carry her across the muddy places down by
the brook, and tell her fairy tales while they popped corn by the winter
fire. But as to that look in his eyes whereof Cousin Jane prated—well,
I’ve never seen it; and I rather doubt if she did either.

Yet somehow I can’t help the uneasy feeling that she has hoodooed my
secret hopes. She never had influence enough to counteract anything
other members of the family might elect to do; but whomever she sided
with was a subject for condolence. She could never be suppressed when
she espoused a cause, and her well-meant activities were invariably
fatal to the best-laid plans. What have I done that, in addition to all
my other afflictions, Cousin Jane should thrust herself upon me as an
ally? I had counted so comfortingly upon her opposition. David was never
fond of her, and it is only of late years that she has ceased to predict
for him a future of State support. It isn’t that she’s fond of the boy
now; it’s because Cousin Chad found out how he managed that affair for
the Peon last winter, and because the farm here at Bird Corners is
becoming one of the show places, agriculturally, of this part of the
State. And if a richer suitor appears she’ll discard David like an old
shoe.

I confess I am taking great comfort in the very apparent devotion of
David’s old antagonist, Robert White. He is older than David, and is
advancing rapidly in one of the largest banks in the city, of which his
father is an important director. Bob is a nice fellow, little spoiled by
prosperity, and his prospective fortune quite overshadows David’s—in
fact, he is one of the “catches” of this part of the State. He has been
staying out here at his father’s ever since Caro came home, and makes no
secret of the reason. If Cousin Jane becomes aware of him she will
espouse his cause, _con amore_, and my own hopes will have a rosier
appearance. Poor Bob! I don’t bear him a bit of malice; but I must shunt
Cousin Jane off on somebody!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 5th._ Caro left us last night, protesting as she went, and
insisting that she would come home in defiance of everybody if I had any
more backsets. But we all want her to finish the year under her new
singing-master: her voice is really wonderful, and she ought not to stop
yet. The six months will be gone before we know it; and then she will
come to stay.

For myself, I have stored up delight enough in these ten days to
brighten this dark January weather for weeks to come. And the days are
already lengthening. Spring is on the way, in fact—and summer won’t be
far behind.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 10th._ What winter colors could bedeck the world I never knew
until today!

First came the rain—a soft, misty down-dropping which fell noiselessly
on the half-frozen earth, softening the icy ridges in the road beyond
the porch, till they crunched under Uncle Milton’s heavy feet and
splashed into the water collecting in their ruts. Long before sunset
they wheeled me back to my room, where the thickening clouds shut us
into a twilight gloom, through which the north wind’s voice cut icily.

By morning the clouds were gone, and with them had vanished the
work-a-day earth. In its place is a world of faery, of glitter, of fire,
of pallid white. Over all the fields the snow lies thick, down to the
very edge of the brook. But above the snow, from the smallest weed whose
skeleton shakes in the bitter wind to the topmost twig of the tallest
tree, is silver and fire and ice. The stubble is all one elfin glitter;
and beyond the gate, along the pike, where dried golden-rod, poke-berry,
mustard, and all earth’s wild outcast beauty blossomed months before,
are billows of frost-wrought loveliness as pure as pearls and as
delicate as the fronds of ferns.

Overhead the sky is deepest blue, rich foil and background for the
trees, all silver here, all glitter there, and everywhere starred with
flashing points of red and blue and orange, as some jagged point of ice
catches the sunlight and tears it into dazzling shreds of color.

Deep blue, overhead; but everywhere along the horizon a soft, colorless,
distant sky, across which the half-congealed moisture of the air draw
its dimming yet invisible veil. The hills are pale, aloof; but here and
there the low sun strikes them and smites the glory of their tree-tops
into a halo of pearl and fire about their brows. And what may be the
beauty of life more abundant when the beauty of life withdrawn clutches
the heart like this?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 13th._ There is nobody to fellowship with today but the
blackbirds and the English sparrows. David is off lecturing at some
farmers’ institutes, and the Peon left this morning for a week’s trip.
Grumpy is here, as usual, and the pain in my spine; but I am not of a
mind to fellowship with them; they can sulk together in the corner if
they want to.

Eh, but when the dark shuts out even the scandal-mongering sparrows, the
room is a bit empty and lonesome-looking! Grumpy and the back don’t
count; they are both in the skeleton-closet. But the key seems lost, and
they have an unpleasant way of peeping through the crack of the door.
There’s no sense in staying here this night, so it’s ho, for
Make-Believe for me!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 15th._ When one can’t have the big things one wants, one can at
least play with the little things one has; and in doing so may learn
with growing thankfulness how great a resource a little thing may
become.

There are so many playthings in the world—no need is left unsupplied.
When one is too ill to think and too weak to look, there are fleeting
glimpses, through half-shut lids, of blue sky beyond one’s windows, of a
drifting cloud, a flash of wings, or the waving of boughs in the wind;
beautiful pictures which return uncalled-for to float above that sea of
pain wherein one rocks, and to steady one with a half-consciousness of
an upper world of beauty and peace, real, though beyond one’s reach.

And when one can think a little—oh, so many things! One cannot possibly
be cut off from life if one’s heart be in it. It isn’t the moving of
one’s body that counts, but the clasping of life with the heart. We
really live to the exact extent we _care_, and so find the interest with
which every atom and phase of life is stored.

    “_He brought an eye for all he saw._”

Was ever anything more beautiful said of any one than that? And that is
what I pray for—the seeing eye; that, whether my body be well or ill, I
may enter in at the open doors which swing wide on every hand, and see,
and love, and rejoice; understanding where I may, and happy where I may
not to watch, to learn, to wonder like a child.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 15th._ The real freedom of life is measured not by one’s
liberty to do as one likes, but by the things one can afford to do
without. And there is no poverty in such freedom: it is through the
enrichment of the inner life that one’s resources grow great enough to
enable one to dispense with the outward things once so necessary.




                                   V
                              PREMONITIONS


_January 21st._ This is one of those beautiful, balmy days which
sometimes come, late in January, to convince the veriest blind pessimist
that spring is on the way. The chickadees are half mad, flying headlong
from tree to tree, and singing their gay little winter score with an
_abandon_ unknown before. The titmice are whistling cheerily; and the
jays, though not a hint of spring sweetness softens their harsh tones,
are dancing a little in the hackberry as they squawk. The wren is
singing rapturously, as he has done all these sunless weeks, not because
of spring-time and April air, but because love and life are always
present with him, and nothing else matters.

The mocking-bird is still solitary, wrapped in contemplation, like some
prophet of old. Nor is the cardinal singing yet. But his not singing is
no sign of faint-heartedness. Yesterday he perched in the tulip-tree and
_said_ “Cheer! Cheer! Cheer!” soberly, decidedly, as if the sweet
reasonableness of good cheer had grown upon him through the dark January
weather. He will be singing it soon.

There! I’ve been out on the porch, and written in my note-book on a bad
day—the best bad day I’ve had yet; and when bad days are best bad days
Grumpy may as well take a back seat.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 28th._ Best bad days are all very well; but a combination of
best bad days and Cousin Jane is more grandeur than my feeble frame can
live up to. It has taken me a week to catch up.

She drove up just as I closed my note-book—quite in time to catch me in
the act.

“Tsck!” she said in disgust, as she whirled my chair about with a strong
hand and wheeled me unceremoniously into the house. “I suppose you want
to put your eyes out next, and have everybody pityin’ your afflictions
when you’ve made yourself blind layin’ flat on your back an’ scribblin’
nonsense—poetry, like enough!” Contempt could no further go.

“I’m sure you never heard of my writing poetry in your life, Cousin
Jane,” I protested meekly.

“No, an’ I don’t want to. I know just the kind of stuff it ’ud be. But I
don’t see what else you get to write layin’ out there all by yourself,
with nothin’ to see, an’ no sensible occupation to keep you busy. I
never could abide an idler.”

“When did you hear from Caro?” I inquired. In the interest of peace, a
change of subject seemed advisable.

“Why, Caroline’s careless about writin’—which of course I might have
expected, seein’ the way you brought her up. But Bob White’s been up
there lately, an’ I saw him when I went to town yesterday. I met him on
the street, while I was goin’ to get my new glasses, an’ he took me up
to the new hotel to lunch.”

She bridled with pleasure, and I coughed to strangle my laugh of
delight. Bob White paying court to Cousin Jane, without my meddling the
least little bit!

“We had four courses,” she went on in happy retrospection. “I didn’t
know there was such a nice place in town. I don’t eat much lunch usually
when I go—looks like it ain’t right to waste the Lord’s money just
pamperin’ the flesh, as you might say; an’ besides, I’d rather save it.
I never did hold by spendin’ money for foolishness like you an’ John
Bird.”

I’m sure the Peon and I haven’t been on the simplest kind of a lark for
years; and when we went it was usually a picnic in the woods with the
children, and the plainest of home-made lunches; but I received this
snub in silence. Cousin Jane plunged on with her news.

“Bob’s heels over head in love with Caroline—that’s easy to see. It ’ud
be a good match for her, too.”

“But you said you wanted David for her,” I objected in as dolorous a
voice as I could muster.

“I ain’t so favorable to David as I was,” she answered frankly. “He’s
got a mighty ugly temper. He flared up at me downright impudent that
time I spoke to him about Caroline; an’ he good as turned me out of your
room one day, without opening his mouth. He’d lead Caroline a hard life.
Of course I didn’t say a word to Bob, but I saw by the way he went on
how it was. A keen business man like him don’t go a hundred miles out of
his way to visit a girl for nothin’. I know.”

“But you thought David cared,” I pleaded.

“If he does, let him do somethin’ to prove it, ’stead o’ settin’ like a
bump on a log. I ain’t goin’ to help him another mite.”

Cousin Jane’s visits certainly add to one’s list of mercies. I’ve been
telling Grumpy all the week that nothing can be very bad as long as she
no longer smiles on David, but afflicts Bob White with her disastrous
friendship. My clouds are silver-lined indeed!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 29._ The first spring signs the birds give us: we must look
skyward for them, past earth altogether. The next spring signs are
hidden deep, in those dark places where sunlight never comes. For the
violets which empurple the long borders, like the song of the Carolina
wren, are not a sign of spring, but a constant witness to ever-present
life. They bloom every month of the winter, just as the bird sings. The
spring-time message is brought by something of a frailer courage than
theirs—something which must needs retrace steps the violets have never
taken.

So today, as the Peon wheeled me out to the maple, he stopped at one of
the jonquil beds while I climbed down to brush aside the leaves which
protect the bulbs from frost, and to stir the earth with loving fingers.
Not yet. Life is at work, I know, but too deep down to be seen as yet. I
drew the leaves back again, my hands shaking a little with the joy of
grubbing in the dirt again—real outdoor dirt, that runs clear through
to blue sky on the other side, instead of stopping at a saucer six
inches from the top of a pot. How many years! Would I ever make up for
the lost years, I wondered, and then caught my breath and the Peon’s
hand with a laugh. For the cardinal was singing again—_Cheer! Cheer!
Cheer! A-wet-year! A-wet-year! Cheer! Cheer!_

It was a dull, cloudy day; but vision had come to him, and what he saw
he would live up to. He sat on the grape arbor, back of the jonquil bed,
and sang, deliberately at first, stout-heartedly, but with a rising tide
of joy—_A-wet-year! Cheer! Cheer!_ A wet year seems to be his idea of
heaven and spring-time rolled into one. Rain—and swelling life! The
lost years will be made good yet. And shall one grudge the time for
rain?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_January 30th._ I ventured on the subject of Caro with David last night,
and find myself wondering many things. The fact that I have always
admitted the children’s full right to reserve from me any secret they
wished to keep largely accounts, I believe, for the closeness of their
confidence. And I didn’t intend to pry now—only to open a way in case
he chose to take it, as I used sometimes to make confidences easy for
him as a child.

“Bob White is laying siege to Cousin Jane’s favor, Davy, dear,” I said,
using the baby name he still loves in our private talks. “She has sold
him her good-will for a four-course lunch.”

David laughed a little.

“Worst affliction could happen to him, I should think. What on earth
does he want with it?”

“She thinks he’s in love with Caro.”

“Probably is. Most of the fellows are; and Bob’s nobody’s fool.”

He had cuddled his brown head under my hand as he sat on a stool by my
bed, and I couldn’t see his face. His voice was so very natural that it
suggested an effort to make it so.

“Well, I doubt if he displayed any special wisdom when he tried to win
Cousin Jane over—if he tried,” I said. “When you go courting, I don’t
think you’ll spend much time on the girl’s guardians.”

“Not much time on anybody, you mean, till I get things settled.”

“And you’d rather I waited with the rest, dear, wouldn’t you?”

He lifted his head and sat facing me, stroking my hand.

“I couldn’t talk about it, little Mammy, even to you. But I wouldn’t
mind your knowing about it if you could understand without words. You
have always done that when I couldn’t talk.”

His eyes met mine fully, his heart unveiled behind them. That is one of
the beautiful things about David’s reserve—the secret door he opens
into it for one whom he truly loves.

“I do understand,” I said slowly. “But, remember, dear, a woman loves to
be loved. You musn’t have any reserves with her when the time comes. Let
her understand your love is great enough to justify the demands it makes
upon her. If she hurts you at first, don’t try to shield her by letting
her think it’s a light matter. Be as honest with her as you are with
yourself. And you’ll win her, dear; I know you will. And you’ll do it
all by yourself, with no meddling nor helping from anybody.”

He straightened his broad shoulders.

“I’ll do it that way or not at all, little Mammy. Suppose somebody
else—even you—helped me to win her; it would be up to me to hold her,
wouldn’t it? And how could I ever be sure of doing it if I hadn’t been
enough for her at the start, by myself? If I’m not enough—if I can’t
make myself enough—I couldn’t afford to have her at all.”

He rose to his full six feet of height and stretched his clenched hands
above his head.

“That stool cramps my legs these days,” he said. “I remember how proud I
was when I found I could sit on it squarely and get my toes to the
floor. Legs change, don’t they? But the only way I change is to love
more the folks I love at all. Goodnight, you sweetest mother a boy ever
had.”

He bent down, rubbing his cheek against mine in the dear caress of his
baby days, and went out. He never was a boy to kiss one; but he always
loved to stroke my hand, and to touch my cheek with his. He always
loved, too, for me to receive his caresses passively; it is only when he
tucks his close-cropped head under my hand that petting from me is in
order.

So he loves Caro. Half of my hope has come true. And here I lie,
trembling with fear. Is there any greater mockery than a hope wrecked by
a half fulfilment? If Caro—Now isn’t Grumpy a clever imp? I’ve faced
him down and out about the pain for nearly three weeks, and shut him up
in the skeleton-closet with all the gruesome things I’m determined not
to be nagged about; and so he sneaks out on an entirely new tack, and
flaunts David and Caro at me instead of my own spinal column, which is
his customary trade-mark! But if I don’t want him associating with my
own anatomy, which heaven knows is too depraved to be further
contaminated, why should he aspire to the children’s company? And if
David loves Caro, isn’t that proof I was right in thinking they were
made for each other, and that Caro’s love will answer his? _Sur-e-ly,
sur-e-ly, sur-e-ly, sure!_ Just hear her bird-double out of doors:
Grumpy as a prophet isn’t in it with the little red-brown wren!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_February 7th._ Milly came to see me today. Grace has been for more than
a month with George’s mother, who has been very ill. I was lying here
thinking of her as I watched the jays outside, and of what Caro said
when she was at home.

Caro never could stand Cousin Jason, and has called him Cousin Jay ever
since the first summer we came to Bird Corners. I took her to spend the
day at Grace’s, and she went with Milly and her nurse down to the brook
to wade. The brook divides Cousin Jason’s land from theirs; and the
children, finding some of his hogs in Grace’s pasture, drove them before
them with much laughter and little clods of earth. Cousin Jason, hearing
his squealing beasts, came charging down the hill in a fury and jabbed
his petty wrath straight to poor little Milly’s heart. She was always a
timid creature, like her mother, and, like her mother, unkindness made
her physically ill; so she wept miserably, poor baby, while her
half-uncle stormed. But Caro flamed into wrath as fierce as his own. She
had been feeding the birds that morning, and had jumped from the stool
by my cot afterward a dozen times to scatter the jay-birds, who were out
in unusual force, and bent on pecking off the head of any other bird who
ventured to take a crumb. She sprang in front of Milly now, ruffling
like an angry wren.

“Go home, you horrid—jay-bird!” she shrieked; “you peck, an’ peck, an’
peck, _all_ the time! I hate you! Cousin Jay, Cousin Jay!”

He stared at the mite, speechless, with purpling face. Milly gasped with
fright, and old Aunt Susan, as she afterwards declared, “done choke
herse’f ’mos’ ter death swallerin’ her laff.”

Caro took Milly by the hand.

“Let’s go home an’ play party,” she proposed calmly; “we don’t like pigs
and jay-birds.” And back they went.

Cousin Jason was immensely impressed. He told me about it afterwards,
himself, and declared that he wished Milly had a little of Caro’s
“spunk.”

He even tried, in his not very happy fashion, to be friends with the
child, and has always treated her with more consideration than any one
else he knows. But Caro will have none of him, and to this day calls him
Cousin Jay to his face. He is a man of large bulk, with a face at once
sharp and heavy, as unlike Grace in body as he is in soul. And I’m
afraid he makes life pretty hard for her.

When her husband died, Grace was left sole mistress of his estate—which
included, according to our beautiful state law, the plantation she
inherited from her father. But her brother calmly assumed the management
of everything. Cousin Jason is really a Mohammedan born out of due
place. He cannot conceive of a woman’s having mind or soul of her own,
much less rights; and he proposes, in all honesty, to do his next-of-kin
duty by the widowed family fool. Grace, I suppose, was too broken by
grief to realize what she was doing; but in any event she would probably
have given way to him; she spent her girlhood, as she now spends her
widowhood, trying to keep her half-brother in a good humor. She yielded
to him absolutely, even to giving him power of attorney over all her
belongings, and to vacating her own pretty rose-colored bed-room, with
its private bath, on the first floor of her home. Cousin Jay never liked
to sleep upstairs; it was too far from his work, he said.

He has certainly, the Peon says, made everything pay well; he has Cousin
Chad’s own genius for money-making. But he does not believe in spending
money, nor, of course, in giving it; nor in being bothered with “idle
gossiping women who ought to be at home minding their husbands’
affairs.” (He is never conscious of a woman except as the appendage of
some man.) So Grace controls neither her own money nor her own home. All
her gracious hospitality, her wise open-handedness to those in need, is
a thing of the past. It is difficult for Milly even to have ordinary
visitors, except in the afternoons; and if it were not for the child’s
other-worldly beauty, before which the judgments applied to most girls
are abashed, one would almost call her dresses shabby. But it is not
easy to think of her dress, the girl herself so charms one.

She has been telling me a little of her troubles, poor child; they have
been hard to manage in her mother’s absence. Chief among them, as I
infer, mainly from what she did not say, is the difficulty of being
properly courteous to Robert Lincoln, without calling down Cousin
Jason’s boorish wrath on the young man’s head, as well as her own.

“You see it isn’t as if he were one of us, Cousin Lil,” she said, her
soft cheeks flushed, her eyes large with unshed tears: “he’s a
Northerner, you know, a New Englander. He’s interested in the interurban
lines they’re building and projecting here in Tennessee, and he really
lives in the city—I mean his headquarters are there. And when he comes
down here to see us, why, it isn’t real Southern hospitality not to ask
him to a single meal. But I daren’t. And once Uncle Jason came right
into the parlor and banged the fire-irons around and glared and kept
looking at his watch. And it was only half-past nine, Cousin Lil. That
was just after Caro went back; and he really hasn’t been here since. I
do hate for _Northern_ people to think——” a tear slid down one cheek;
but the slight shrinking of her pretty hand showed me she could not bear
to be petted just now; she did not want sympathy, but help. She
swallowed hard and went on.

“And you know next morning at breakfast I spoke to him—not to
criticise, you know, nor anger him, of course. I told him not to be
afraid that I would forget his wishes; that I told every one it kept him
awake to have anyone stirring after ten o’clock at night, and that
Mother and I always closed the house then; and I said it was only
half-past nine last night.”

“What did he say?”

“Why, he just stormed, like he always does, you know. He said he wanted
to go to bed early. And he got up without eating his breakfast, and
slammed the door and went out. I had to run clear to the barn after him
and beg and beg, before he would come back.”

“What on earth did you want him back for?” I inquired.

“Why, to eat his breakfast. He hadn’t had his coffee, and he’d have had
a headache without it.”

“Milly Wood!” I gasped.

“Mother always coaxes him back,” said Milly, with gentle finality; “at
least, she always tries. Sometimes he won’t come, and then she takes it
to him herself. You know he has terrible headaches sometimes.”

“But, dear, if you would only face him down just once.”

“Oh, I couldn’t,” said Milly, shrinking. “And Mother would never get
over it. You don’t know how she feels about Uncle Jason. She says he’s
never had the best of life, because he never has known the love that can
give its all. She’s sorry for him, and she wants us to make up to him
for what he has missed.”

“Well, you’ll never do it,” I said. “Nobody but Jason Blue can ever make
good that loss to him.”

“Sometimes I think Mother ought to require some things of him,” she
said; “but she won’t; and I know I’ll never make it harder for her by
doing what she doesn’t want. But I wish he didn’t live at home.”

She kissed me, smiling rather forlornly, and went away, while I lay here
wondering about Mr. Lincoln, whom I have never seen. But David and Caro
liked him, which is sufficient passport to my favor.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_February 12th._ The mocking-birds have a constant fascination for
me—the charm of a complex nature which touches life on many sides. One
can know a robin by heart in a single season, and predict with one’s
eyes shut the doings of any one of the tribe; but a mocking-bird is a
different proposition.

His song throbs with the pure joy of living. It is the song of one in
the world and of it, and rejoicing so to be; yet there is in it a
haunting suggestion of aloofness, of mystery, of something beyond one’s
ken. It is as if his joy had deeper foundations than sunshine and
plenty; as if he had lived through pain, clear to the other side of it,
and learned that it, too, is good.

His powers of mimicry, I think, are greatly exaggerated. He does not
really sing other birds’ songs, as his cousin, the catbird, does; he
merely experiments with their notes—a stave from a thrasher here, a
light-flung oriole measure there, a thrush note, piercing sweet, a bit
of the wren’s summer trill. It is as if he would try life on all sides
and look at it from every point of view; his ear is keen for the music
from every throat. But always, through all this imaginative performance,
he clings to the integrity of his own message. One may hear a catbird
for an hour, and, unless one sees the blithe gray mime among the leaves,
never suspect his real identity. But all a mocking-bird’s borrowed notes
are woven into the texture of his own song, which wholly claims him as
the melody rises, sweeping him with it bodily up to heaven, and carrying
the listener’s heart with him. His is the rapture of open vision,
feathered mystic that he is.

Now, a bird like that one would expect to be a recluse, dwelling apart
in cloistered green, afar from his fellows and from mankind; but the
mocking-bird flatly declines that rôle. He is a bird of affairs,
friendly and neighborly withal, a haunter of men’s doorways and
house-vines, and a public-spirited citizen who rejoices to succor the
oppressed. For he has a fine, full-fledged temper of his own, and any
amount of fighting blood. He rarely seeks a quarrel; but if one be
thrust upon him, either by aggressions attempted upon his own rights or
by the call of another bird in distress, he accepts the combat with
alacrity, and carries it joyously to a triumphant conclusion. And three
minutes after the enemy is routed his voice floats down from the highest
perch in the vicinity as if he were singing at heaven’s gate. He has
fought for all he is worth, yet not a feather of his spirit is ruffled.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_February 15th._ When I can catch Grumpy and call him to his face by his
right name, he always disappears; but blue devils are so very clever at
disguising themselves, and at concentrating one’s attention on their
instruments of torture!

This morning, for instance, he hid under the foot of my bed, and kept
poking up all sorts of things where I couldn’t help seeing them; the
things the Peon and David need me to get well for; the things I long to
do; the idleness I so desperately hate—for he can make even an
abstraction visible, being a very clever devil indeed. Then he held up
the pain, turning it round and round, and counting off the time like a
clock—minutes, hours, days, months, years, and never an end in sight. I
had to look out of the window in self-defense; and there I saw a
kinglet.

Except the winter wren and the humming-bird, the kinglets are the
smallest birds we have. But they make up in energy what they lack in
size; and this one dashed about as if his very life depended on his
getting his breakfast in ten seconds and catching the seven-thirty
breeze to Somewhere. Grayish-olive, of course; but was his crown of
ruby-red, or of orange, crimson and black? And why should a mite of the
tree-tops be so inconsiderate as to carry his trade-mark on the top of
his head?

I was almost in despair about him—for when you meet a bird, it is of
consuming importance to know whose acquaintance you have the pleasure of
making—when he took pity on me of his own sweet will. Perhaps the
breeze was a thought late, and he had a moment to spare: but he perched
on a twig just outside the window, bowed his tiny head toward me, thrust
one claw up between his wing and his body, and scratched the back of his
neck for the whole of one second and a half!

Golden-crowned! The cunningest striped pate, red in the middle, with a
yellow band on each side, a black band next the yellow, and a white line
over his eye. Then he flung up his head as boldly as though it were
mountain-high, jerked his wee tail-feathers frantically, and squeaked in
the finest and most wiry of voices, the astonishing information that it
was only Grumpy under the bed, at his old tricks—a creature for nobody
to pay attention to. And as soon as he found himself discovered, my blue
devil took himself off.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_February 20th._ If I can’t go outdoors, outdoors can come to me! The
windows are all open this morning, and my bed so close under them that I
can lie here and stretch my hand into the outside world, where the lilac
is rapidly leafing and the elms and maples are all abloom. A moment ago
Uncle Milton stepped into view, one hand holding his hat and the other
filled with jonquils.

“Is you gittin’ er little better, honey?” he inquired. “Hit’s gittin’
spring-time now, en Milton wants ter see you ridin’ roun’ in dat ar
cheer you got. Ef we-all puts er mattress in it, don’ you reckon we kin
git you down ter de holler by de gate? Des see what come f’um down dat
er way dis mawnin’—dem holler jonquils allus did beat dese yere up on
de hill.”

He reached the flowers through the window and laid them upon the
bed—the first flowers of the awakening year; for the violets are
ageless, belonging neither to the new year nor to the old. I caught up
the golden beauty with a gasp of joy.

“Oh, thank you, Uncle Milton! I knew spring was coming true before long!
And I’ll be walking down there when they bloom again: don’t think I’m
going to live in beds and wheeled-chairs forever.”

His brown old face beamed.

“Dat’s de talk!” he exclaimed gleefully. “Ef dat ain’t de Forest sperrit
my name ain’t Milton, sho’! You look like yo’ pa endurin’ er de war. You
keep talkin’ dat erway, honey, en feelin’ dat erway, too. Hit’s sperrit
en spunk what cyores folks a sight mo’ dan doctors en physicin, I lay my
little Missy gwinter be runnin’ roun’ yere yet, makin’ ole Milton hop.”
He walked off, chuckling to himself.

Josie brought me a vase, and I set the flowers in it as flowers should
be set, lovingly, and one by one. It has been years since I have been
down in that hollow, just this side of where the road turns out into the
pike; but I can see it as if I were there this minute—the maples
blooming overhead, the meadow-larks flashing the white of their
tail-feathers as they fly, singing, on the hill beyond; the twigs in the
strip of woodland down the road, shining yellow, tan, and red with the
rising sap. The blue-grass is under foot, soft and thick, and all
through it rise the spears of the jonquil leaves, and the swinging,
golden bells. Along the fence runs the broad band of iris, matted close,
the pointed leaves already taller than the jonquils. Cardinals and
mocking-birds are calling all up the hillside; and down under the
willows and sycamores at the water’s edge the myrtle warblers are
swarming, and thinking of donning their gay spring suits. Oh, I can see
it all, all! A little wind is dancing along the hillside, and the
branches touch one another softly, the dry, scraping, winter sound all
gone. The wren’s spring song is in full blast, the bluebirds are
twittering, and even the jays’ voices are turning sweet. The breath of
life is everywhere, and the joy of it. I can feel the wind in my hair,
and the grass under my flying feet—_My flying feet_! For a moment I had
forgotten. But here are the four close walls, the narrow bed, the
endless, wrenching pain. And I could not walk even to my sofa today,
though the Peon’s life were my reward.—Eh, well, and what of that? Did
I not run in Make-Believe? And shall I shut my eyes to joy and beauty
because my locomotive apparatus is laid up for a few repairs? I may be
walking clear out to the hall again before the week is out, and be out
in my chair on the porch tomorrow. Love and sunshine really are enough,
no matter what Grumpy says—even love without the sunshine: and here are
both, and flowers besides, and the spring-time everywhere out of doors.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_February 25th._ Grace was here yesterday. She has a way of dropping in
when she is most wanted and leaving a trail of sunshine behind her. She
is a quiet little body, never hurried or fretted, and she has a genius
for discovering, in the most unlikely places, virtues invisible to the
naked eye. She sees the wrong and mean things, too—she’s not at all a
goody-goody person; but she keeps the wrong and the wrong-doers so
entirely distinct and separate that you wonder how you were ever so
stupid as to confuse them. She’s really devoted to that cranky old
half-brother of hers. She is always commiserating him because he did not
have her mother, and his own died when he was born. She’ll explain and
expound him till you think he really is noble, only he never had a
chance to learn how to do noble things.

It is certainly a pity, however, that his education is in such a
backward stage. Robert Lincoln and Milly are becoming much more than
friends; and Cousin Jason’s infantile ignorance of other people’s rights
is anything but conductive to comfort under the circumstances. But
Grace’s one idea, as usual, is that dear brother Jason must not be
crossed. He takes it so hard, poor fellow, when things don’t go as he
wishes. And if Mr. Lincoln is as seriously fond of Milly as he professes
to be, he may as well make up his mind to be satisfied with winning her,
if he can succeed in doing it, and not be too exacting with her
relatives.

Poor Grace! As if I don’t know the kind of young-ladyhood she believes
in Milly’s having, and is simply aching to give her! But evidently
Cousin Jason’s will is to be law.

The truth is, as I told Grace, Cousin Jason is just like Cousin
Chad—though they’d both foam at the mouth to hear me say it. But
they’ve neither of them any sense of proportion. That’s why they have no
sense of humor, nor power to get their own personalities in proper
perspective with other people and their rights. But why, asks Grace
calmly, shouldn’t we be as sorry for a person born with no sense of
proportion as for a person born with only one eye? Of course the lack of
a sense of humor is harder on the kin than the lack of an eye would
be—Grace admitted that handsomely; but in neither case was the
afflicted party to blame. And didn’t one really deserve more sympathy
when his affliction necessitated his also being a bore?

We fell to giggling as we discussed this knotty point; and I was so far
converted to Grace’s charitable views that I had Uncle Milton get a
basket of double jonquils for her to take to Cousin Jane. Cousin Jane
always did admire my double jonquils, and somehow her own never succeed.
I like the single ones much better myself; the others, like my revered
relative, are too clumsy and fat. I told Grace to say I sent them to her
on the principle of sweets to the sweet. And now I’ll be having another
visitation, for my sins!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_February 27th._ Pitch dark when I woke this morning; and pain to make
one clench one’s teeth. Grumpy is not hilarious company at such times,
but occasionally he helps by overdoing things.

This morning, for instance, he began about the unendingness of
things—sickness, and the long night, and all that—till it struck me
all at once it really was morning that second, and only looked like
night. Besides, the pain is like this, often, when I don’t feel blue a
bit: so it isn’t the pain that makes me miserable—it’s my own mood
about the pain; and if a seasoned old party like me can’t manage her own
moods, what’s the world coming to?

Only, sometimes I can’t manage them, and I don’t know why. They sweep
over me like the waves of the sea, and trample me like wild horses. It
isn’t often like that; but when it is, I know I’m in for it—and also
that I’m dead sure to get out of it after a while. I’m lying here—this
racketty old body, with a piece of me, myself, inside it, just about as
miserable as such a combination can get to be. And the rest of me is
hanging around outside, looking on, and saying, “Just lie low and keep
quiet, old lady. It’s tough, but it won’t last. Lay your nose to the
wind and let it howl. If it blows you even on both sides, you’ll get out
of it without being crank-sided, and that’s the best you can do.” So I
lie here; and after awhile the comfort of knowing it’s just a mood soaks
in till I can feel it and get the good of it—and then the storm is
past. I come out of it, too, with my self-respect unimpaired; because,
no matter how it raged inside, I did keep quiet on the outside till it
blew over.

So it blew over this time also. And after awhile even Grumpy was forced
to admit that it was morning, for all the world was drenched with light.
The long, level beams slipped across the hills as the sun rose, and
touched the tree-tops, one by one; and behold, life had risen—in the
night. Every twig of the tulip-tree was tipped with green where the
great terminal buds had burst their sheaths; and down by the brook a
fairy mist of color clung tenuously about the willows. The mocking-bird
was in a rapture of prophecy in the maple; and the English sparrows were
actually housebuilding in a beautiful hole in the scarlet oak.

Nobody else thinks of nest building yet; but among the birds, as among
humans, the increase of population is most rapid where one would fain
find it least. These sparrows will be rearing half a dozen families
before the year is out—good, large families, too; and it behooves them
to select their apartment early in the season. That hole belongs to the
wrens, but that’s of no consequence to the sparrows, who have the
pleasant habit of taking whatever they want.

It must be owned they are a hardworking tribe, even though their works
be evil. If the fathers left their wives to do all the work, after the
bluebirds’ fashion, some of the broods would surely starve; the mothers
would succumb to nervous prostration before all the mouths could be
filled. But the head of the family rolls up his feathers and pitches
right in, from nest building days until frost. Nuisances though they be,
there isn’t a shirker among them; and they will drop their petty
personal squabbles instantly, to make common cause against any bird, big
or little, not of sparrow feather. But they shall not have the wren’s
hole for all that—not while Uncle Milton can climb a tree for me.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_March 6th._ The blackbirds are falling in love. Even sensible, lovely
creatures are a bit comical when hard hit by the tender passion. In its
first inflammatory stages it so utterly destroys the patient’s sense of
proportion that one smiles even when one’s heart is aglow with sympathy.
But a blackbird lover, a sleek, slick gentleman, oppressed with more
dignity than an archbishop could carry gracefully, trying to unlimber
enough to convince his _inamorata_ that he desires her favor when he
merely wishes to air his perfections for her dazzlement!

One flies to a branch in plain sight of the greedy black gang, gobbling
crumbs below, and meditates. Shall he condescend, or shall he not? Well,
maybe she is worth it; and it will display his feathers to an admiring
world. He ducks a little, spreads wings and tail, rises a-tiptoe, and
says something through his nose to call attention to his noble self,
though a compliment may be tacked on in the last note. I know that’s
just the way Cousin Chad did it when he courted Cousin Jane. And think
of the laughterless depths of Cousin Jane’s soul that she found it a
performance to take seriously! Things are pretty much evened up in this
life, after all. It is true Cousin Jane has no back; but think of a
blackbird husband—and of me with the Peon!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_March 10th._ Rain, rain, rain. I’ve been examining my mercies this
morning to see which of them can stand the strain of a three-days’ cold
down-pour, a week of almost utter sleeplessness, and a spine that is
conducive to profanity. The mercies look badly frazzled; but they were
all right the other day, and couldn’t possibly wear out as fast as this.
I suppose it’s the same old trouble—my eyes are moth-eaten, and need to
be done up in camphor at once.

Anyway, it’s a piece of a mercy that if I had to get so much worse I did
it in weather when I couldn’t go outdoors if I were able. It is awfully
cold. Grumpy says it will frost when it clears off, and all the peaches
will be killed. Cheerful, isn’t it, when David’s pet peach-orchard
experiment is in full bloom for the first time? But the peach trees are
like us humans: they never can tell what is ahead of them. They have to
go on in the dark with such capital of good-will and ignorance as they
possess, and take the consequences without kicking.

I think the titmice might be counted as mercies today. The other birds
have disappeared, but the titmice are as jaunty as possible in their
trim gray rain coats, whistling like boys calling dogs.

And pray, if a titmouse can keep his crest starched in this down-pour,
why should the spirit of mortal be limp?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_March 12th._ If one be born a coward, one cannot help that; and what
one cannot help is no disgrace, but a burden to be carried in patience
to the end of life.

But in my childhood it came to me that though one be born a coward
beyond escape, it is never necessary to behave like one. That has been
my comfort a thousand times, and it is my comfort tonight—a comfort
great enough to hold me steady in the iron grip of pain.

Coward I am, and will be, to the end of life. But I have not behaved
like a coward this day! And now the day is ended—lived through forever.
And I can remember it unashamed.




                                   VI
                            BEFORE THE DAWN


_March 18th._ If the outward pressure of necessity for self-control be
great enough to balance the inward pressure of pain, one can keep fairly
steady. But a week after the Peon left on one of those long western
trips something came up that made it necessary for David to drop
everything and go to Atlanta. He was detained there beyond his
expectations, and then wrote me he must go to New York before returning
home. He begged me again, as when he first left, to send for Grace; but
I did not want her. At first it was a relief to be alone, with no need
for effort or concealment. Afterwards, I did not want her because her
sympathy would have been more than I could bear.

It wasn’t just the day’s pain, or the night’s—one can usually manage
that somehow. What Grumpy did was to set today’s pain by that of
yesterday, and the day before that; to add last week’s to last year’s,
to the pain of ten years, twenty years, back. He applied his
recollections like a mustard plaster, and rubbed them in like a
liniment. Then he took tomorrow, and next year, and the year after that,
and built them all into one long _via dolorosa_—a life-time path of
pain. I might have stood that; I have before. But beside the pain he set
the idleness—this horrible, useless idleness. That is the killing part!
He set it all before me, as plain in the black and sleepless nights as
in the day: and while I cowered, he gibed and threatened till I feared
to look ahead and dared not hope. And when I tried to run away to
Make-Believe, for the first time in all my life I could not find the
way! That finished everything.

So I lay still and silent one age-long night, shut fast in my body at
last, the slow tears dripping on my pillow on either side. Suddenly, in
the dawning, a purpose leaped within me; Ella should come to me—here,
in this very room, from which I could no longer escape. If Make-Believe
were closed to me, I would command her here. I would tell her
everything: I could not bear it in silence any more.

Since we first went to the city I had loved her. And after Great-aunt
Letitia died, until she went North to live, she had been constantly in
my home. And after that—oh, we knew the way to Make-Believe, we two!
Never a day but we met there, for many a year. She knew all about the
pain, though we never spoke of it. It wasn’t merely that words were
unnecessary, but that pain, in her presence, seemed so small a part of
life. Nothing really mattered but love and kindness and happy human
laughter.

Yet she had never had a real home, nor even a care-free childhood. Her
life had been one long sacrifice for those who took her bounty as their
right. But the laughing blue eyes, the heart of kindness, the sturdy,
sensible, joyous spirit of her, blended of love and humor and common
sense! The children in the streets ran after her, and tired faces
brightened as she passed.

For three years and a half now I had not seen her, even in Make-Believe,
where I met every one else I love, both living and dead. Somehow I could
not pretend about her any more, after that strange day when my letter
came back unopened—the happy letter I had written to tell her I was
going to a sanitarium to be made over new, so that I could come and pay
her a “really truly” visit on my way home. She never saw the letter.
They sent it back unopened; and I could not play about her any more.

But now, if I must stay shut in my body, she must come. She should never
leave me. I would tell her every day just how hard life was. And she
would be sorry for me; she would understand. I reached out with all the
life left in me to draw her out of Make-Believe, now shut against me,
and bring her to share my prison, and to hear my complaints.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I turned my head upon the pillow and lifted my heavy lids. She was
coming toward the bed. I raised my arms feebly, and her own were round
me. My head fell on her breast, and I lay there, drawing long, sobbing
breaths, while she stroked my hair with firm and gentle fingers. There
was no need for speech: her touch was always plainer than other people’s
words.

But presently I was aware of a difference in her touch, a something new
and strange. I whispered weakly, without opening my eyes.

“What is it dear? What troubles you? Why don’t you speak to me?”

Silence. Only that tender, pitying touch.

“I knew you’d be sorry for me,” I whispered on; “and oh, I want you to
be! I wouldn’t have called you if it were real, you know—I wouldn’t
hurt you for the world. But nothing can hurt you now. Isn’t Love so
plain to you, and the end of things, and the reasons why they must
be—isn’t all that so shining clear to you that even my being like this
can’t hurt? Tell me about it. I want to know it is clear to
somebody—I’m so far gone in the dark.”

Still no answer.

“Then be sorry for me,” I went on, dashing my desperate pleading against
that strange, disquieting silence. “I’ve borne so much. I must tell
somebody, and it isn’t fair to talk about it to them here at home. I’ve
never talked to anybody before, even to you. I’ve never even cried,
never once, except all by myself in the dark. And I’m such a coward
about everything, and specially about pain; I’ve been so afraid of it
all my life. And it never stops. It’s been years, Ella, years and years.
And oh, I can’t bear it any more! You don’t know what it’s like just to
be still and suffer when you can’t _do_ anything. It wasn’t so bad when
I could keep going; I could fight. But now I can’t fight any more. I
want to die. I think God ought to let me die.—I’ve tried; I’ve tried my
best so long. And I can’t try any more.”

The words were scarcely breathed, and I stopped in exhaustion, the slow
tears dropping on her breast.

Still she did not speak. Deeper and deeper sank her silence, pressed in
by that strange, tender touch.

Suddenly I shivered, and my eyes flew wide. Her own were full of love
and sorrow—a sorrow that looked past all my complaints to something
deeper and more vital. I shrank away from her.

“I can’t,” I said. “I can’t any more; I can’t.”

Behind the sorrow in her eyes a light was kindled; but it only
frightened me the more.

“I have tried,” I protested. “I’ve done nothing else the most of my
life. Is there no pity, even in you?”

Still she gazed; and something in her look called to something dead in
me. I shook my head feebly and closed my eyes; but through the shut lids
her gaze commanded.

“I have come to the end,” I persisted; “and if you do not understand,
there is nothing left. I can’t try any more, and I won’t. Go away.”

I gasped as I said it, and opened my eyes again. Her look pierced and
held me like the point of a sword. I turned my head from side to side,
shivering, but there was no escape. The dead thing in me stirred to life
and dragged itself up to look truth in the face once more.

“Yes,” I said, “It is true. I can’t because I won’t. I thought I
wouldn’t because I couldn’t, but that is a lie. I can endure if I
will—and if I can, I must. But will it never end?”

She lifted her head a little. Her eyes shone, and a smile curved the
sweet corners of her mouth. It was not the old, brave, happy laughter,
but something wiser and more compelling—the overflow of an exhaustless
joy.

“You _know_,” I whispered. “You learned it even in your life down here.
And to keep on trying is to conquer, isn’t it?—even though one fails
with every breath. And the only irreparable calamity is to turn coward
and quit.”

Her face was heavenly sweet.

“I must never send for you again?” I asked, like a child. “Not to say
things are hard, or to cry?—But if I play, in the real Make-Believe,
will you talk to me there as you used? If I see you there I won’t need
you this way again. Good-bye.”

Her fingers brushed my hair once more as I lay back on the pillow; and
then I knew she was gone.—O bravest friend! Not even in my own coward
thoughts could your courage be bent to the service of fear; to think of
you was to find strength, even against my will!

For a long time I lay there, while the slow day passed and twilight
deepened again into night. All her life passed before me—its
selflessness, its courage, its joy. No creature that knew her went
unblessed of her. What gifts pain brought, what power of helpfulness,
what fullness of life and love!

Suddenly, there in the deep stillness, it was as if the night were drawn
away like a veil; and I saw out to the very edges of the world, and back
into far-off ages, and on into days that are yet to be; and everywhere
was light. And the light came from countless faces; and I knew that to
each one pain had come—pain of body or pain of soul—and because of the
pain they had found the light. And down, under the light, looking up to
it, drawn by it, stumbling forward by it, were those to whom the vision
had not come. And I—was I offered such a fellowship only to run away in
fear?

The veil of night fell dark again, but a song was in my heart. When
daylight came I wrote it down—the song my friend had given me. It is
called

           _THE INITIATES_

    _Wide as the world their company,_
      _Many the paths they tread;_
    _Here may a toil-worn peasant be,_
      _Yonder a crownèd head._
    _Famed or unknown, each one must fare_
      _Forth on a bidden way;_
    _That which awaits no man may share,_
      _Lonely ’mid throngs are they._
    _Yet comrades all they come to be:_
      _Far-sundered, yet one line,_
    _They march in this great company,_
      _Deep in their souls its sign._

    _How shall ye know them? Some there be_
      _So wasted and worn and weak,_
    _So anguished in body, ye all may see_
      _They bear the sign ye seek._
    _But some in this brotherhood there be_
      _Who in such secret wise_
    _Meet suffering, no man may see_
      _Wherein their sorrow lies._
    _Their laughter rings out true and free,_
      _Ye look for the sign in vain,_
    _Nor guess they are of this company,_
      _Marked with the mark of pain._

    _Thus shall ye know them: On their eyes_
      _Falls the light of things unseen;_
    _Their pain-cleared vision sweeps the skies_
      _And the hearts of men, I ween;_
    _The things that pass, and the things that remain,_
      _Lie open to their sight,_
    _And that which they learn as they dwell with pain_
      _Gives strength to the world, and light._
    _Patient, and wise, and glad they be,_
      _Rich with love’s own increase—_
    _They of this world-wide company_
      _Who suffer, and find peace._

    _Freed as by fire? Yet the fire shall pass,_
      _And the freedom shall stand for aye;_
    _And what would be the hope for the mass_
      _If these should shrink in dismay?_
    _So may I cast aside all fear;_
      _So may my soul aspire;_
    _So may I climb pain’s pathway drear_
      _To heights of my soul’s desire._
    _And there, with heart grown wise to see,_
      _Counting nor loss nor gain._
    _May I serve with this brave company_
      _Who bear the mark of pain!_




                                  VII
                              SPRING MAGIC


_April 2nd._ The Peon came home ten days ago, and David a day later.
They looked as solemn as owls, and developed a tendency to neglect their
business and sit in my room which was fast getting on my nerves. So I
rose up and put a stop to it. You simply can’t lie still in peace when
your eyes won’t stay open, if you have any consciousness that somebody
is watching you while he’s pretending to read a book. And I don’t need a
doctor. I’ve been like this, and worse, a thousand times, and the Head
said when I came home I was bound to get well crab-fashion—going
backward lots of the time. So I laid down the law that if my eyes were
shut and I didn’t speak when they opened the door, my family was to be
sensible and go away.

That was why I didn’t look when the door opened one day last week. I was
thinking of all the Head had said about backsets, and how, when they
ended, I would come out of them more and more quickly, and they’d be
farther and farther apart; and I was wondering how fast I’d go, once I
had finished with this one. When the door opened I hadn’t the energy to
spare for talking—I needed it for my cheerful speculations. But,
instead of going away, my visitor came quietly in. Then I heard a little
gasp, a soft rustle beside me, and little warm hands caught mine—Caro’s
hands! She was there on her knees, her face hidden in the bedclothes,
and crying as if her heart would break! Caro crying was a sight to
galvanize a graven image: I sat up straight in the bed and drew her to
me.

“Dear, what is it?” I implored. “Tell me quick: I’ll fix it!”

She bubbled with laughter as she caught me in her arms and eased me back
on the pillow, dropping a tear and a kiss on my nose.

“You darling! If you were at your own funeral and heard one of us
crying, you’d hop right up and straighten things out for us, wouldn’t
you? There’s not a thing the matter with me except I’ve been so homesick
for you all winter I couldn’t stand it any longer: and now I’m crying
because I’m so glad I’m home.”

“But Caro——”

“Don’t ‘Caro’ me and don’t ‘but’ me, for I’ve come to stay. Mammy Lil,
you’re an accomplished liar; but when your writing kept looking like
chicken-tracks, I knew better than to believe a word of your sprawly,
rickety tales that trailed all over the sheet. And I _hate_ music. And
besides, I can drive the family to drink with what I know already.”

“But Daddy Jack, dear, and Cousin Jane.”

Caro laughed again.

“Daddy Jack says he wrote for me yesterday—after I’d started, all by my
smart self. And I’ll tell Cousin Jane after a while. She’ll have
something brand-new to lecture us about for the next twenty-five years.
I feel like Carnegie and Rockefeller rolled into one: it isn’t often she
gets the benefaction of an enormity like this, is it?”

It had been a cloudy morning, dark, and wet with the night’s rain; but
now the sunlight swept across the hills and up from the branch, and
struck through the soft colors shimmering about the trees like rainbows
in a mist. The Peon and David tiptoed in, beaming.

“You’d better let us go by and break the news to them at Cousin Chad’s,”
said David; “you’ll get a shock over the ’phone if they aren’t
prepared.”

“I’m going over there this afternoon,” said Caro calmly. “I’m going all
by myself and engineer Cousin Jane through the boiling-over process;
she’ll be all right when she settles down to a simmer. Now get out, both
of you: Mammy Lil and I want to rest.”

She slipped into her kimono and stretched herself beside me, holding my
arm across her breast and stroking it with a light touch which expressed
everything without words. Once in awhile she talked a little in her own
sweet, whimsical way, and then lapsed again into the silence of utter
content.

I turned my head to speak to her presently, and found her gone. The
shadows, which had been dancing up toward the house when the sun came
out, had lengthened all down the lawn to the valley, and across it to
the hills on the other side. I lay watching them with that long-lost
sense of refreshment which follows unbroken sleep. Down by the gate
David was letting in Caro’s pony-cart and climbing to a seat beside her.
Presently their laughter floated through the windows, and then she was
in the room again, perched on the window-seat by the bed.

“I’m trying not to be proud, Mammy Lil,” she observed in a chastened
voice; “but Cousin Jane is done to a turn, and almost cool enough to set
away in the cellar. She’s pleased with me, too; she said if she just
could have kept Lyddy from meddlin’ she believed she could have raised
me up to be a real comfort to her. Why didn’t you let her? She gave me
some outing cloth to make into petticoats for a missionary box that’s to
go west. Who but Aunt Jane would bestow fuzzy petticoats on missionaries
in the spring? But she bought the stuff at a bargain sale for four cents
a yard, and feels that it’s providential; and we can put in plenty
ourselves to make up for it.”

“And she won’t fuss about your staying here?” I asked anxiously.

“Why, of course she’ll fuss; how could she get any fun out of it if she
didn’t? But she’s fussed all she’s going to right now; and next time
I’ll make some more petticoats, or cut down her fifth-best winter coat
for one of the little missionaries to wear on the Fourth of July.
——Don’t look so horrified, Mammy Lil; you know I’ll never let it get
in the box! Now lie still like a good child till I fix your supper. I’m
going to feed you myself,” and she fluttered away, singing under her
breath.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_April 5th._ Caro is in the window-seat, feather-stitching the
missionary petticoats, with one eye on the birds in the yard. The jays
have always roused her special ire; and yesterday one flew to the
hackberry, in plain sight, with a little naked nestling dead in his
wicked bill, tucked it coolly under his toes against the bark, and
devoured it before our eyes. This morning, in the intervals of
courtship, they have diverted themselves with crumb-snatching. They sit
on a limb above the scattered morsels where a dozen or more birds are
feasting. There is bread in abundance for all, but the jays love
hectoring even better than eating. One will watch till some bird picks
up a crumb, and then drop like lead upon his astonished victim. The
unfortunate drops the crumb, of course; and before he collects his
scattered wits the jay is back aloft with the morsel safe under his
toes, picking leisurely. Caro sat laughing and scolding till a little
red-brown wren flew down and was pounced upon in a twinkling. The wren
dropped his crumb, but turned upon the bully with lightning quickness
and a volcanic explosion of wrath utterly out of proportion to his size.
The big bird, amazed at the onset, flew up to his perch in a panic, and
Caro clapped her hands.

“Oh, grand! grand!” she cried; “don’t I wish Milly Wood were here to
see! I told her yesterday if she’d lay Cousin Jason out she could manage
him: and just look at that blessed wren.”

“Milly isn’t a wren, though,” I said: “she hasn’t a glimmering of the
wren’s gift of speaking his mind. Look at the wood-thrush, dear; you see
the difference? When the wood-thrush turns on a jay, I’ll have hopes of
Grace and Milly—and not before.”

The two wood-thrushes have been in the yard for days, the shyest,
gentlest of creatures, ready to fly off at the flutter of a leaf. They
have not touched the crumbs yet, but hop nearer every day. The jay
watched one of them extract a worm from the soil, however, and lit upon
him plummet-fashion. The wood-thrush dropped his half-swallowed morsel
and fled in a panic to the black ash, where my glasses revealed him, his
breast feathers bristling with terror, a mere puff-ball of fear.

“That’s Milly,” I said.

“But, Mammy Lil, anything can run a jay if it will only stand up to
him,” persisted Caro; “I don’t see why Milly submits to it. She can’t
ask Mr. Lincoln to a single meal. When he comes out in the afternoon he
has to motor all the way to Chatterton for his supper and then go back;
and Cousin Jay goes in the parlor when he does come, and glares at him
and looks at his watch, and yawns—he’s simply insufferable. I’ve asked
them both over here; Milly can stay all night, you know. But she says
she won’t dare to come often, or Uncle Jason won’t like it. Not like it,
indeed! I wish he belonged to me—I’d ‘uncle’ him!—There, that
petticoat’s all ready to proclaim Cousin Jane’s thriftiness in clothing
our dear missionaries on the frontier. I’ll make them for the sake of
family peace: but I’m blessed if I’ll take them to church to be packed:
she can escort her offering herself.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

_April 8th._

            _COMPANIONSHIP_

    _Afar in heaven is Love? Ah, no!_
    _Follow the path where wild-flowers blow;_
    _Store in thy heart the songs which swell_
    _From wayside hedgerow, wood and fell;_
    _Mark where the young year’s opening leaf_
    _Answers the wail of doubt and grief,_
    _And where, fresh burgeoning after rain,_
    _Life learns the inner heart of pain._
    _Let care and passion sink to rest,_
    _Calmed ’neath wide skies on earth’s green breast;_
    _And hearken while the steadfast hills_
    _Breathe strength to fainting human wills._
    _And through this changing, fair disguise_
    _Know thou Love’s voice, and meet Love’s eyes!_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_April 10th._ Out on the porch again, in the warm, sweet air, with all
birddom for company. Caro has gone driving with Bob White, after
wheeling me here for my own pleasure and for the Peon’s astonishment
when he comes home.

The robins have a secret in the seven-trunked maple. The leaves are so
thick no one could guess it except by their vigilance in guarding the
tree. They have made a law that no jay, of any age, sex, or size, shall
alight in it, nor poke his bill among its branches, nor brush it with
his wings in flight; and the law they have promulgated they are ready to
enforce. Dark and bloody tales are told of jays—tales of cast-out eggs,
of murdered babies, and stolen nests; wherefore no jay shall frequent
that maple, “then, since nor henceforward.” Hence, wild curiosity among
the jays, agitated caucuses in the pasture oak, and unanimous decision
to visit that maple at all hazards, singly, and in groups. They watch
till the robins are at some distance, and fly up to the tree on the far
side, three or four strong, while the robins, their backs to their
threatened castle, drag forth reluctant worms by the middle. They seem
absorbed in their hunt, but they know! In the twinkling of an eye they
are at the maple, and no jay may abide their coming.

Nor will the robins, after these aggressions, tolerate the jays
elsewhere. They may be pecking at the foot of a tree when a jay alights
noiselessly in its topmost branch. They see, apparently, through the top
of their skulls; and one jay or six, it is all the same to them. They
dash up with the _élan_ of a picked regiment, and again the jays shriek
and fly. Not a jay has pecked on this lawn this whole afternoon, nor
roosted while the robins pecked. Time and again they have sallied in
from the pasture, and as often they have dashed squawking back. It is a
strenuous life for the blue-coats: but it certainly keeps things
peaceful for the rest. The wood-thrushes have ventured near today, and a
pair of chippies have come up on the porch, almost to my chair.

Yesterday evening a dozen mocking-birds were here on the lawn, singing
singly, answering one another, and joining again and again in choruses
that whelmed the grove in melody.

I lay in the growing twilight listening to them and thinking once more
of all that passes, and of all that can never pass, when suddenly
through the closing dark came the wild, sweet song of the wood-thrush,
the first I had heard this year: _U-o-lee! U-o-lee!_ The three notes
form a perfect minor chord; and at their end a sudden spray of rapid
tinkling notes, and the song again repeated, and again.

They say the thrushes have two sets of vocal chords, long and short, and
the double vibration accounts for the splendid richness of their tones.
But when those wild, appealing notes call through the gathering darkness
one thinks, not of anatomy, but of the _Sursum Corda_ in a church, and
of all the souls who shrink before some cup of suffering and yet accept
it, not merely with courage, but with clear vision of the joy beyond.

Up from the brook the song came, and far out on the road it was
answered: _U-o-lee! U-o-lee!_ What magic fills the haunting notes with
subtle suggestions of human weakness, of trembling courage, of faith no
suffering can slay? And when they ceased, the mocking-birds took up the
theme and carried it, far into the moonlit night, to its inevitable and
triumphant conclusion—the song of the victor on the heights who has
conquered in the lowest depths.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_April 19th._ Cousin Jane insisted on Caro’s going to town with her
yesterday, ostensibly to do some shopping, but really, I think, to give
Bob White a chance to take them both to lunch. Bob comes out pretty
often, and is as assiduous in his attentions as Caro will permit. I
cannot see that she especially favors either him or David. She goes more
with David, but her attitude toward him is so frankly affectionate that
it is not as encouraging as it might be. He meets her quite on her own
ground, and appears entirely satisfied. Everybody, in fact, seems
contented except Bob White and Cousin Jane, to whom Bob pays strenuous
court. Caro went with her to town with her usual light-hearted
acquiescence in any plan proposed. She takes life as it comes, and makes
a joyful occasion of the most commonplace happenings. But before she
would agree to go she made Milly promise to come and spend the day with
me: and this morning the two of them, with the Peon’s and David’s
assistance, escorted me out to the maple tree in a triumphal procession,
and established me on a cot in the real outdoors.

Milly scattered the crumbs for me, and sat by my cot with her
embroidery. I thought the others were off for the station when Caro came
flying back, pinning her hat on as she ran.

“Mammy Lil, Milly needs some lessons in ornithology. Prod some of the
birds till they chase the jay: and be sure you tell her what turncoats
the rice-birds are.” Her eyes danced.

“The rice-birds?” I inquired stupidly. “Why should I tell her about
them? They’re not here anyway.”

“One of them’s here,” she said gravely; “I’ve seen him.

    ‘_Robert of Lincoln is gaily dressed_’—

“Beware of bobolinks, Milly: they’re worse than jabberwoks;” and she
dabbed a little kiss on the end of my nose and was off.

Milly flushed to the roots of her hair, looking at me shyly.

“He and Caro are great friends,” she said; “you know she’d never joke
about him if she didn’t like him. She calls him Reedbird, Rice-bird, and
Bobolink, and says that so many _aliases_ are sure proof of villainy.
Sometimes when she begins to discourse on birds before Uncle Jason she
scares me out of my wits. But luckily he doesn’t know one bird from
another, except the ones that bother his crops. To think how he has
lived in the country, all his life, and never seen anything in earth or
sky except crops and money! I do feel sorry for him, Cousin Lil; but I
can’t feel as sorry as mother does, because I get so angry with him.
He’s—he’s insufferable sometimes.”

“Why don’t you make him behave?” I asked.

Her face paled.

“Make him?” she repeated wonderingly. “How on earth could anybody make
Uncle Jason do anything? Caro calls him jay-bird, and that’s just what
he is.—Look there!”

The thrushes were actually breaking bread with me this morning; and as
Milly spoke a jay dropped from his hiding-place overhead, and managed to
light on both of them at once as they pecked peacefully side by side.
They dashed madly away and dropped under the beech, panting, their
breast-feathers bristling with fear.

Milly was quite white.

“That is what he is like, even when you’re trying so hard to please
him,” she said. “I can’t imagine what would happen if you opposed him.”
Her underlip quivered a little, and her eyes filled with tears.

“I’ll show you what would happen if that jay will just hang around here
till a catbird comes,” I said. “There are plenty of them about, and a
catbird stands no nonsense from anybody.”

The jay elected to remain. He chased the cardinal, and tormented the
thrushes till they flew away to the brook. Then he perched overhead,
preened his feathers, and surveyed the world with an air of impeccable
virtue,—tyrant and Pharisee in one. Presently, after the fashion of his
kind, he began to peer and pry, leaning forward and thrusting his bill
out with an evident intention to stick it into the business of the first
neighbor who happened in reach.

It was just then that the catbird came for his lunch. The jay perked his
head eagerly, thrust out his meddlesome beak, dropped to the innocent’s
back, and lit there with vicious pecks. The catbird, panic-stricken,
scrambled out and dashed to the hackberry, while the jay gobbled in true
jay fashion, and I lay feeling that Providence had slapped me in the
face—an overhasty conclusion, as our criticisms of Providence
frequently are. The catbird, after due meditation, came back to the
maple, and delivered his opinion of the jay in vitriolic language. The
jay, scornfully unheeding, flew to a neighboring limb, tucked a big
crumb under his toes, and proceeded to eat it. The catbird returned to
his lunch; and when the jay dropped again, he hopped sideways, turned,
and faced his tormentor. He spread out his wings and tail and began
dancing furiously up and down, as if he were set on springs, not moving
an inch from his place, and uttering discordant cries. The jay gave back
amazedly. The catbird hopped a hop nearer, resumed his dance, and
repeated his former remarks. The jay backed; the catbird hopped nearer,
and danced. The jay dashed up against the maple trunk, where he clung to
the bark like a woodpecker, looking down apprehensively, while the
catbird continued his dance and his deliverance on jay manners. It was
more than the bully’s nerves could stand. In another moment he was off
to the pasture, and the catbird’s ruffled plumage lay sleek again as he
turned back to the crumbs.

Milly was pale with excitement, her eyes wide.

“Do you think—” she breathed, and paused, afraid of her own question.

“I know it,” I said confidently. “Just try it awhile.”

“But mother,” objected Milly; “you know he’d take it out on her.”

“Isn’t your mother going to stay with your grandmother some time next
month, while your uncle and aunt take that trip North they’re planning?
Do it then.”

The child was absolutely white.

“I—oh, I couldn’t, Cousin Lil! If I began, I’d be afraid to go on. He’d
make me give in.”

“Your mother won’t go for several weeks,” I said easily; “don’t look so
frightened. There’s nothing to be done today.—What a pretty pattern
that is you’re working; let me see.”

We sheered away from Cousin Jason, and took up the subject of Robert
Lincoln’s perfections, which proved numerous. Then we had lunch under
the maple; and when the Peon came home Milly went back.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_April 21st._ Caro telephoned me she would stay all night at Cousin
Jane’s, and did not come home till yesterday noon. I was out under the
maple again, and watched her through my glasses, as she drove in from
the pike in Cousin Jane’s buggy, with a small darkey beside her to take
the horse back. The buggy was loaded with bundles, which she toppled out
on the grass beside me before jumping after them herself. She sat on the
edge of the cot, and plunged into her tale and her packages together.

“Do you know what took Cousin Jane up to town, Mammy Lil? She’d seen an
advertisement of one of those cheap stores down on Union Street about a
sale of all-linen handkerchiefs for three-and-a-half cents, only twelve
to a customer. And she traipsed all the way to town to invest forty-two
cents in handkerchiefs for the missionary box—two for the mama
missionary and two each for the five kids. Wouldn’t you just love, if
you were a little kid missionary, to have two whole
three-and-a-half-cent handkerchiefs of your very own—a fresh one every
week of the world? Mammy Lil, sometimes I’m real fond of Cousin Jane,
cranky as she is, and sometimes I want to slap her. But I didn’t: I just
bought some decent handkerchiefs, so they can use Cousin Jane’s for
window screens—they’re coarse enough. Then Bob White turned up and we
went to lunch. They both pretended it was an accident, but I don’t
believe it; and Cousin Jane frisked like a rhinocerous, and was so
pleased ‘over our little tête-a-tête,’ as she was pleased to call our
triangular lunch, that I nearly died. And Bob was—no, it wasn’t Bob; it
was I. I was just cross. So I wasn’t a bit nice—you know I really can
be horrid, Mammy Lil, when I put my mind to it. I’m sorry; I’ll make it
up to Bob next time I see him; but Cousin Jane is such a donkey!
Goodness knows, though, I paid for that in full!”

She broke into rippling laughter.

“What did you do?”

“Why, she was just huffy—awfully. She’d hardly speak to me; and I was
in such a good humor again! We’d gone back to the stores, and I’d bought
some lovely lawns—one for you, and one for me, and one for Mrs.
Missionary. Let me show you.”

She jerked a bundle out of the pile and displayed her purchases, her
head cocked meditatively on one side.

“Yours is lavender and mine pale green. They’ll have lots of lace on
them, and we’ll both look ravishing. I got Mrs. Missionary a blue. My
instinct is that she’s sallow and red-headed; so I resisted the
blandishments of a pink one that was two cents a yard cheaper, and
bought this. Cousin Jane says it will fade. But that was after I
pacified her: she wouldn’t speak before.”

“How did you manage it?”

“Why, I told her I was sorry I was cross—I really was—and I said I’d
go home with her and make Cousin Chad one of those frozen puddings. I
didn’t dare offer to make it for her, but she eats as much of it as he
does, which is saying a good deal. She softened visibly; so we hurried
for the first train, and I worked like a black slave to get it done in
time. They ate like anything, and I let them both give me good advice
till bedtime; and this morning I made the butter for her, and we parted
like twins.”

I laughed and patted her hand. She raised one eyebrow and looked
thoughtful.

“Cousin Jane and Cousin Chad think it’s time I was married,” she
observed.

“To whom?”

“That’s a secondary consideration, though important. But Cousin Jane was
married at sixteen. I’m already an old maid of twenty—or will be next
month; and if I go off in my looks, I won’t find it so easy to go off
matrimonially. Besides, I’m flighty and bad tempered, and a husband will
be good discipline. And Bob White is a very nice young man who would
probably put up with my temper more than most. And he’s rich. And Cousin
Jane thinks if I try hard enough maybe I can get him. What do you think
of it, Mammy Lil?” She pursed her mouth and frowned judicially.

“I think Jane Grackle’s a goose—and you’re another,” I said, laughing.
“There comes David. Call him to wheel me back to the porch.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

_April 29th._ Summer is coming everywhere. The pasture fence is a long
wall of bloom, and the odor of honeysuckle fills the air. A wonderful
place for bird-babies that will be soon! For ten days the roses have
been blossoming, and Uncle Milton’s flower-beds are beautiful to see.
And I—the earth isn’t the only dead thing that rises into life! There’s
another miracle coming to pass: for I am getting well!

All this month I’ve held my breath like a coward, and turned my head,
afraid to look joy in the face. It has come near so often before; and
each time the pain has snatched me back and bound me hand and foot. So I
said I would never inflict on myself the agony of disappointment again.
But I just can’t live up to that foolishness, and I’m so glad I can’t.
If this isn’t the ending, but just a blossoming oasis in a desert way,
shall I miss the joy of that? It’s nearer the end than the last one was,
anyway, and better and brighter and bigger. If it isn’t fulfillment, it
is prophecy, and that’s the next best thing. Some day it will come—the
Head said so. I am to be part of life again—I! I! Some day I shall go
in and out again among my kind, with power enough of living in me to
make hours atone for days, and months for years. Nothing shall pass me
that is mine! It is human life I want, not birds and trees and flowers:
they’re beautiful, but they aren’t enough—I can afford to let myself
say it now, because the other is so near, so near! I used to be part of
life here, long, long after I was sick: there was nothing I couldn’t
help about, nobody who didn’t smile at me as I passed: in every face I
saw a memory of kindness given and received. And I’m going back to it,
to my real life.—Ah, soon or late, what matter? _I’m going back!_
Though a thousand downfalls be in the way, I’ll make it yet: and be this
fulfilment, or only prophecy, I open my heart to joy!




                                  VIII
                          BLACKBIRD DIPLOMACY


_May 9th._ Something is dreadfully wrong with Caro, and for once she
does not give me her confidence. She went to Milly’s night before last
quite her own bright self, and came back to lunch yesterday another
creature. A shower came up just after lunch, so I lay on my porch sofa
until it passed, with David and Caro for company. I imagine things had
gone wrong at the table. I saw, by Caro’s bright color and the high way
she carried her pretty head when she came home, that trouble was brewing
for somebody, and she probably found David’s sunny and unsuspicious good
humor the negative complement of her own surcharged spirit. There had
been at least a minor explosion; for when they came out to me they were
both making an effort to appear quite like themselves. But Caro’s eyes
were danger-signals; and, though David smiled and his voice had its
usual deep evenness, his eyes kept a furtive and brooding watch on hers.
She seemed in the gayest of spirits, yet there was some jangle in the
mirth which had always rung sweet and true before.

The thunder was rattling overhead, and the wind-blown curtains of the
rain shut out the hills beyond. David walked to the end of the porch and
studied the clouds for a little before he came back.

“I was afraid this storm would spoil the drive you promised me
yesterday,—” he began.

Caro’s eyes sparkled.

“You need not resort to the weather as an excuse,” she said, “I don’t
want to go at all.”

David stared, and a slow color burned under his tanned skin. Then he
looked half-amused.

“Caro must have been having some kind of an extra tilt with Cousin
Jason, Mammy Lil,” he said, “and she thinks I’m an old jay, too, and
keeps ruffling her feathers at me.—I was about to say that the sun
would be out inside of an hour, and by five o’clock the roads will be in
the pink of condition. I’ll show you what Peggy can really do in the way
of speed.”

“I told you I don’t want to go,” said Caro, angrily.

“I beg pardon,” said David easily; “you told me you would go. I couldn’t
possibly be mistaken.”

I was looking at Caro in open-eyed amazement. She had never spoken to
David that way in her life—nor to any one since she had ceased to be a
child. She caught my look, and colored deeply. Then she cuddled her face
against mine so that neither David nor I could see it.

“Dear Mammy Lil, don’t look as if you didn’t know me,” she said, with a
sudden little catch in her voice; “I’ve always told you I’m hateful, and
you won’t believe it; when I convince you, don’t quit loving me.”

“You silly child,” I answered, patting the red-brown coil of curls;
“I’ll never quit loving you, whether I’m dead or alive. But I was afraid
you weren’t well.”

She laughed and pecked my cheek.

“I’m well as ever was.—Have Peggy ready, David: I’d like to go sixty
miles an hour.—Oh, dear, I’m losing all my hairpins!”

She wasn’t at all. But she caught her hair with both hands, and vanished
through one of the long windows. David looked after her with the set
look which I had learned to know when he was little more than a baby.
Then he, too, kissed me, and walked away, after putting the stand with
my bell and a plate of biscuits on it close beside me.

I lay there puzzled and troubled. The rain stopped presently, and I
crumbled the biscuits and flung them out on the grass, watching the
birds idly.

Promptly at five David drove round with Peggy, his favorite mare, her
beautiful head held as high as Caro’s own, and as free from torments of
check-rein and blinders. She shone like satin, and stepped with a proud
consciousness of her own worth and her master’s confidence in her. David
sat chatting with me during the ten minutes Caro kept him waiting. She
had on the pale green lawn when she came out, and a most fetching hat
which she had herself concocted to go with it. I beheld her adornment
with dismay. The lawn was more lace than lawn, and I knew she had
planned it for what she called a “partyfied” dress. She usually went
driving with David bareheaded, and in whatever garments she happened to
have on. Her finery boded him no good; and I realized with a sinking
heart that if I had had the wit to keep my astonishment out of my face
she would have stuck to her first refusal, and the drive would have been
postponed to a more auspicious day. David was riding to disaster—and I
had opened the way.

It was almost dark when they came home, and I had been back in bed for
some time. Caro came in looking distractingly pretty, and sweeter than a
naughty child should. I knew by the lavish bounty of her caresses that
she had treated David very badly indeed, and was torn between a desire
to take her in my arms and get the whole story out of her, and a wish to
set her in the corner till she should return to her normal state of
mind. But I remembered what I had promised David months ago, and
repressed my itch to meddle. She had always confided in me before, and
unless she did now I must be dumb.

David, I did not see until morning. He had brought Caro home and had
returned at once to Chatterton, sending me word he had an engagement and
would not be at home until after I was asleep. It was after midnight
when I heard him come in. This morning he came to my room as usual, but
his eyes looked as if he had not slept. I pretended to see nothing,
because he wished it.—But what had happened to Caro? If she had been at
Cousin Jane’s I might have suspected some mischief-making; but she went
only to Grace’s. Whatever caused the change, it goes deep. She has been
in her own room all day, and I have not even heard her sing.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 12th._ Caro has left us and gone to Cousin Jane’s—gone there to
live. She went day before yesterday, and I have felt too stunned to
think.

She stayed in her room all day, except at lunch time, and came out late
in the afternoon, looking white and tired, but with that same danger
signal in her eyes. I was under the maple, and she sat on the stool
beside my cot.

“Mammy Lil,” she began, with a forced lightness, as though she spoke
only of trifles, “I’ve been packing my traps today. You’re so much
better now, you don’t really need me all the time, and I think I ought
to go to Cousin Jane. Cousin Chad’s my real guardian, you know; and
they’ve been awfully good about lending me to you when you were so
sick.”

I felt blinded at first by the blow. “Lending” me Caro—when she had
never stayed a whole month together away from me since she was seven
years old, except for the years at boarding school! My head swam, and
there was such a roaring in my ears I couldn’t hear all she said. She
wasn’t looking at me, but her voice went on with the foolish words, till
I pulled myself together.

“Has Cousin Jane been trying to make you think it’s your duty to go and
wait on her, Caro, after you’ve grown up in this, your real home? She
doesn’t need you, child; there’s no call for such a sacrifice.”

“She hasn’t said a word about needing me,” protested Caro. “I just think
I ought to go.”

“Are you sure—forgive me, dearie—but do you really think she wants you
there to live—for always?”

“I telephoned her this morning. I’m sure she’s delighted. She does love
me,—only it’s in her queer way.”

“Caro—” I said, and stopped. We had lived in her and for her so many
years. I could not suggest that she owed us anything. The tears came to
my eyes, but I held them back.

“Dear,” I went on, “I’ve never tried to force your confidence, and I
can’t now. Something is wrong, I know—some trifle, probably, that a
little honest frankness would set right. But I know when we are young we
come to a place where we must manage our own affairs, no matter how we
bungle them or how many hearts we break; it’s the way we all learn at
times. But darling, remember that my love waits to help you, if you ever
want its service. And, whatever you do, Caro, don’t do it in anger like
a child. It is the mark of a woman to walk in love, and to serve love
only, even where she must give the deepest hurt.”

She sat looking across the hills, only her profile toward me, but I saw
her lip quiver. She dropped her head on my shoulder and snuggled her
face under my chin.

“You’re the sweetest mammy! You know I love you—more than ever I did in
my life. And I’m coming to see you so often you’ll think I’m living
here. But I’m sure I ought to go. There’s the buggy now; Cousin Jane
said she’d send it over. My trunk is all ready; she’ll send for that,
too. I thought I’d rather you’d tell Daddy Jack and David good-bye for
me. Won’t you let me take you back to the house first?”

“No,” I said; “David will help me, and your Daddy Jack. It isn’t time
yet.”

She caught her breath a little, kissed me with a sorry effort at
playfulness, and went towards the buggy. I watched it driving out the
gate to the pike.

Neither David nor the Peon came, and after awhile Josie came out to say
that “Mr. John” had telephoned he would have to spend the night in the
city. She wheeled me to the porch, and I was back in bed before David
came in. I was thankful for once that the Peon was away.

David went to his solitary dinner, and then sat by me in the twilight,
stroking my hand.

“What struck Caro to go off again?” he asked, in a tone he tried hard to
make casual. “Josie says she told her she was off for a visit.”

“She went to Cousin Jane’s—went to stay, I mean. She’ll change her mind
in a few days, I suppose. She has been upset for a day or two.”

“To Cousin Jane’s—to stay?” he repeated in bewilderment. “And left you
here—like this?” he added in indignant unbelief.

“Dear, something drove her. She’s unhappy about something—there’s some
mistake: and the need to keep it to herself is on her. It makes me
feel—oh, Davy, boy, I’ve always thought I was a real mother to you
children; but I’m only the best substitute for a mother you’ve known. If
I were truly Caro’s mother—if I had done all I thought I was doing—the
child would have told me. You are both suffering for nothing—because I
failed.”

He bent his cheek to mine.

“You’ve never failed in anything, sweetest mother in the world. And Caro
loves you just as I do—I’d swear it. Sometimes you can’t help hurting
the people you love best. I—I’m hurting you myself; and I can’t help
it. I’d give my right hand to help it; but I can’t—yet.”

“There’s no need, Davy, dear,” I said steadily, glad that the dark had
fallen to curtain my eyes. “Don’t try to be anything with me, or to say
anything, but what is natural and right to you. The one thing I couldn’t
get over, dear, would be your playing a part with me. I understand; and
I can wait—a life-time, if you wish.”

He kissed my hand, and sat there till the moon rose over the eastern
hills and strewed the lawn with shadows. A mocking-bird stirred in his
sleep and sang softly to himself. I could not speak. I lay straining my
eyes through the dark to see his face, but it was all in the shadow. He
rose to go at last, and, before I knew it, unbidden words had risen from
some subconscious depth and uttered themselves through my lips.

“David,” I said, with a sudden, foolish up-lift of my heart, “I’m going
to be walking all about by Thanksgiving; and before the year is out I
will help with my own hands to decorate this house for your and Caro’s
wedding. I don’t know how I know it; but I do!”

“Amen,” said David solemnly. “Mammy Lil, you’re a corker when it comes
to prophesying. Keep up the habit; it’s sure comforting; and you always
could see further through a stone wall than anybody else.”

He had—or feigned—more faith in my prophecy than I had myself. I felt
like a fool who has published his folly to the world. And as I lay
there, tearless and sleepless the long night through, I had no hope for
David, and only a dull anguish at thought of the girl I had called my
daughter so long.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 13th._ The world is all in a mist this morning as the sky blossoms
above the eastern hills. The wren sings first, bringing the tears for
which my lids have burned all night. A cardinal calls somewhere—_Cheer!
Cheer!_—no, it is a mocking-bird, for his own notes bubble out after
his cardinal call, before he wanders into a thrasher’s song, repeating
his notes as carefully as “the wise thrush” himself. There he is, on the
topmost twig of that mist-dimmed oak. He has tuned his voice to the
oriole’s carol now, but again his own notes bubble through. Now he
scolds like an angry wren, following the tirade with harsh cries and the
blackbird’s censorious _tsck!_ Then he slips into a catbird melody—a
jumble of music, jeering, and captious squawks. Gradually the music
overflows all else. Clearer and sweeter grow the notes, slow, soft, and
wondrous pure. His head is thrown up in rapture while the flood of
melody rises and swells till it sweeps him bodily into air. He opens his
mist-gray wings and tail, spreading to the light the gleaming white of
the in-folded feathers, and rises through the vapors to clearer air,
singing as one to whom all mists are crystal clearness, all darkness as
the light. He trembles at the height an instant, poised above the
vapor-shrouded earth, while his song floats upward to the heaven of
which it speaks,—a blending of calm and rapture, of aspiration and
peace. Back to his perch he falls, still singing, content with earth as
with heaven, and rises once again, to poise an instant, to fall, to
rise, again and yet again.

It is the Song of the Open Vision. Haunting, appealing, alluring, the
rapturous notes search the listener’s heart to draw response from every
memory of mist-drenched darkness dissolved in growing light.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 14th._ The Peon is the comfort of my life. I dreaded telling him
about Caro, and behold, he knew all about it!

Cousin Chad had been in town and came out on the same train with him
yesterday afternoon. He couldn’t refrain from crowing a little about
Caro and his dear Jane—so capable and sensible, so equal to every
emergency. And it was her doing, after all: I know she never intended
for me to know it. But she met Caro in the road on her way back from
Grace’s that day, and made the child go by home with her. Then she—to
quote Cousin Chad—“was able to make her see the indelicacy of her
establishing herself in the same house with a young man whom gossips
were accusing her of trying to capture!” The Peon at this point
expressed polite dissent from Cousin Chad’s approval of his wife’s
tactful performance; and my pious relative waxed righteously indignant,
and assumed the air of a protector of the defenceless orphan. Whereupon
the Peon took refuge in his paper and Cousin Chad simmered in that
condemnatory silence of his which always seemed to me worse than any
possible swear-words.

But the Peon doesn’t feel at all upset about Caro and David; the only
thing that troubles him is that I should be left alone again during the
day. So far as David is concerned, the Peon thinks Caro would never have
gone if she hadn’t cared for him, to some extent, at least, in the way
Cousin Jane accused her of doing—which is certainly reasonable enough.
And as to her loving David and yet treating him as I’m sure she did, the
Peon begs me to remember some rather cold-blooded performances of my own
in our courting days.

“Do you remember the night after Jessie Martin’s wedding?” he demanded.
“After that night, and your marrying me six months later, I lost my
faith in a girl’s ‘no.’ If I had it to go over again, I’d not lose a
night’s sleep on account of it, my lady: and so I told David as he drove
me home from the station.”

“Oh, you told him, then?”

“I did. And I told him to give Caro plenty of rope, and your Cousin Jane
would soon hang herself with it.”

“What did he say?”

“Not much of anything. He seems to think Mrs. Grackle only furnished the
occasion for Caro’s real feeling toward him to come to the front. He’s
pretty sore, I imagine. But don’t you worry your dear head. Lovers would
miss half the fun of the game if they couldn’t be drowned in misery now
and then. Just let them alone and let them get all that’s coming to
them. They’ll work through it somehow, and straighten it out to their
perfect satisfaction when they get ready—and not before.”

“You didn’t let it alone,” I said reproachfully.

“No,” he said; “that’s why I’m so well posted about the course to
pursue. I’ve done all that’s necessary myself.”

His eyes laughed a little, and I laughed back. Maybe I was a true
prophet after all. Anyway, I musn’t look like a graveyard just because
we’re all lonesome, and David is so quiet as he comes and goes. And if
I’m not to look like a graveyard, the best way is not to feel like one.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 17th._ Things are happening so fast they make my head swim. David
is gone, too; and I feel like an old hen who has raised a pair of wild
geese and seen them go flying out of sight in opposite directions.

He fixed it all with the Peon before he said a word to me. Then he sat
by my cot, with those coaxing ways of his—I knew some kind of a wrench
was coming. He wanted to go out to Washington and take charge of the
Peon’s apple orchard there and finish planting the land. He’d been
thinking of it for some time. The only reason he hesitated about going
was the leaving me alone: but I needed Caro more than I needed him; and
if he went—.

“But oh, my dear, I don’t!” I cried. “You are my first, my best of
children! And as for having Caro—I’ll have her when the time comes of
which I told you the other night. I don’t want her before.”

“Then you’d rather I wouldn’t go?” he asked, trying to keep the
disappointment out of his voice. “You’ve had such an awful pull, little
mother, and been so brave about it: and I know Caro and I helped to
drain the life out of you before you went away. I’ll stay if you want me
to.” He bent his head above my hand, and I saw his mouth was set.

“I’d not hold you a minute, boy,” I said; “distance can’t separate us.
I’ve never been separated from you yet, and never will be while you love
me. It isn’t your being near me that I want: it’s your emancipation,
through life, into freedom of life. The more living you do, the closer
we’ll come together, though the living be done on the other side of the
globe. When would you like to start?”

“Tonight?” he said, inquiringly.

“Tonight,” I answered. “And the farm here?”

“Uncle Milton knows what to do. And I’ve made Uncle Jack a schedule to
follow. It will be all right.”

“And you’re going for how long?”

“Forever and a day. Tell Caro so.”

“Very well,” I said, “I’ll tell Caro forever and a day. But what shall I
tell this old lady who loves you so?”

“Tell her I’ll come at the drop of a hat or the click of a telegraph,
day or night, whenever she wants me—forever and a day. And Mammy
Lil—what’s the use of talking? You understand.”

He pushed his head up under my hand as a signal that one of the rare
pettings was in order: and presently he picked me up in his strong arms
and carried me to his room, where I lay on the bed and watched him pack
his trunk in utter defiance of all known principles of the art.

He found some comfort in doing it, too. His face shows care and lack of
sleep, but he whistled a bit as he dropped his shooting boots on the
bosom of a shirt, and made a soft place for the butt of his gun with a
felt hat. He isn’t entirely hopeless about the outcome, no matter how
miserable he is: it is poor little Caro who will get the heaviest end of
the mischief Cousin Jane’s meddling has produced. And that thick-headed,
thick-skinned old Pharisee will go scot free herself. Oh, dear! I’d like
to be good! But it is such a strenuous undertaking with Cousin Jane in
the family: St. John himself couldn’t manage it; and I never was cut out
for a saint.




                                   IX
                          THE PROOF OF COURAGE


_May 20th._ Caro did not come back until yesterday, though she called
the Peon up daily to ask how I was and to send her love. She did not
allude to David, and the Peon volunteered no information. But yesterday
she dashed in at the gate, driving like a young Jehu, flung the reins to
Uncle Milton, who was at work among the roses at the other end of the
house, and came flying across the lawn to my cot.

“Oh, Mammy Lil, are you all alone? Has David really gone—to stay, I
mean?”

I told her his plans.

She sat on the edge of the cot, her head held high, her eyes sparkling.

“It’s a shame!” she exclaimed indignantly; “how could he have the heart
to leave you so?”

I looked at her quizzically. I had been feeling rather forlorn; but
suddenly the comical side of my woes presented itself, as it so kindly
and so often does, and I wanted to laugh.

“Who ran first?” I inquired.

She flushed to the roots of her curly hair and slipped to the grass
beside me, her pretty head on my shoulder.

“We’re pigs, both of us,” she averred contritely. “But, Mammy Lil, David
is the worst pig. He really could have stayed: and I—couldn’t. Anyway,
I’m glad he’s gone; it’s just about the decentest thing he’s done.”

“You are a consistent child,” I observed, stroking her hair; “but, Caro
dear, I’m not accustomed to hearing David criticized from the standpoint
of decency, and we won’t begin now. And I wanted him to go very much.”

“Well, anyway, I can come back. I’ll never leave you here by yourself.
I’ll go back and pack up this evening, and come home first thing in the
morning.”

I shook my head. I had been thinking about it all these long, lonesome
days. They are both my children, but David has the first right to our
home; and with Caro installed here he will not come back to it. Besides,
it isn’t fair. And if they will fight at cross-purposes we must all take
the consequences together. I know I am rather a dishevelled shuttle-cock
to do duty between their clashing wills; but they will have to have it
out, now that they have begun it. And if that hard-hearted little sinner
came back here, she’d convince herself in no time that David is the
sinner and she is the one and only saint. It never did take long for
staying at Cousin Jane’s to pall on Caro; and she’ll probably see things
from various points of view before she concludes her experiment.

Poor little soul, she cried dreadfully. She even tried to work on my
sympathies by telling me how Cousin Jane serves up Bob White’s
perfections morning, noon, and night. This was welcome news to me, and
helped me to disguise the very fluid condition of my supposedly hard
heart. I must confess we both cried before she went back: but Caro owned
it was fair.

I feel like a yellow dog, of course. One always does when one stands for
a painful justice—it’s part of the job. I felt the same shame when she
was a little thing and I let her bite the red pepper she snatched in the
garden the minute I told her not to touch it. It burns my own mouth to
this day. But Caro never snatched against orders again.

And there’s no sense in listening to Grumpy’s prophecies. Where is the
pleasure of growing old if one can’t learn to distil from one’s
experiences the essential oil of hope? When the Peon and I fell out,
hopelessly, desperately, eternally, about six months before we were
married, I was just a young thing, and quite pardonable in my belief
that my life was ruined forever by the cataclysm. But from the
vantage-ground of twenty-odd years of additional living I should be able
to detect the flimsiness of the average impenetrable barrier. I don’t
think Caro cares for any one else, at least; and if they’re not meddled
with they’ll work it out their own way, which must be the best way for
the Peon and me. And if he and I can’t enjoy ourselves very much just
now, why, we don’t want to when the children are miserable; so that’s
all right, of course.

As to their misery, I have at least come far enough in life myself to
know that it has—or will have—its mitigations. I never yet have been
in a hole—and heaven knows life has been a procession of holes these
last years—that I didn’t get out of it with some added capacity of
living that made being in holes worth while. Why should I begrudge the
children their own hole-adventures and discoveries, their own enrichment
of life?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 22nd._ The Peon comes home early these days and takes me out for a
ride. I can sit in my chair or lie down at will; and he wheels me over
the soft grass to all the places I’ve been longing to see and have only
beheld in Make-Believe. We go down to the brook nearly every day about
sunset and watch the birds quenching their thirst before bedtime. There
are many song sparrows down there; and the killdeers haunt the banks at
all time, whirring up when startled with wild cries, their breasts and
lifted wings flashing snow-white beneath, and the rich salmon of the
lower back gleaming as they rise from the valley into the level sunlight
along the brow of the hill. The Peon flattens my chair to a couch, and
throws himself on the grass or sits on the roots of a sycamore, while we
talk of all the years that the children have been growing up with us,
and of what the future is to bring. We are both very strenuously
cheerful. And indeed, in our hearts, we do hope honestly to have them
both at home again some day. Only it seems rather a long way off
sometimes; and the house is so very quiet when we go back.

Sometimes we go back to the spot we picked out years ago as the one
where we thought David might like to build his home some day; for though
we always hoped to have him with us, we never wanted to rob him of a
home of his own. We had never said to one another that we hoped for Caro
to make the home for him—to put it into words seemed to infringe on
their right to settle that great matter, each to their own heart’s wish:
but we had hoped it without words. We go there now, and hope for it
openly, bridging our separation with happy dreams, and comforting one
another with assurances it is not always easy to feel.

David has not been long enough at his journey’s end for a letter mailed
there to reach us; but it seems as if he had been gone for months. And
poor little Caro looks so wistful when she starts back to Cousin Jane’s
that I feel as though I have been turning her out of doors for the most
of my life. It is really not to be borne very much longer. The Peon’s
sister wants us to go to her next month, at her summer home in the
mountains of Pennsylvania; and Caro will have to come home in time to
get me ready. We can spend the summer together, at least.

But before I go I want to see plainer sailing for Milly and Bobolink, as
Caro disrespectfully styles Mr. Lincoln. Grace was here for a little
while today to tell me good-bye. She is off to stay with George’s mother
while the old lady’s daughter takes a trip. Milly was with her, and
promised to come back soon. She said she wanted to talk to me, and from
the anxious air with which she said it, I’m hoping she is seriously
thinking of turning on that jay-bird uncle of hers and teaching him a
few of the things he needs to learn.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 25th._ A golden day, after a night of drenching rain. The sky is
like October, and under it the winds are at play. And why, when sunshine
fills the world, should one suffer one’s eyes to be blinded to it by any
mote of pain or trouble held close enough to shut out all the light? I
will keep mine at arm’s length, if I die for it, and see around it and
over it, yes, and through it, into this beautiful, wonderful world! If
one’s feet can’t travel, aren’t one’s eyes an open road of escape?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 27th._ Three sleepless nights, a dead weight of weariness,
loneliness to the heart’s core, and pain that wrings the flesh—these
are among Grumpy’s stock-in-trade this morning, and he flaunts them and
a dozen other things, wherever I turn my thoughts. He has heaped up,
mountain high, the things I want and can’t have; and there he sits,
grinning at the void they leave in my idle, useless life. I must fill
that hole, or go under. What have I left?

First, the Peon’s love, and the children’s, and that of my friends.
Love: and the Love from which love came. By the time all that is stowed
away in the void, it has rather a “gone” look about it—for a void. And
Grumpy’s grin has a tuck in it.

Then a sense of humor—the most blessed thing, save love itself, ever
given to human kind. It keeps one sane and balanced where without it one
would go mad. A source of justice it is, a bond of sympathy, a destroyer
of egotism, a solace in suffering, a staff to courage, an open door of
escape from all that is unbearable in life.

Next, the power to hold my tongue when things hurt, and to keep the
whine out of my voice when I’m nothing but whine inside.

There are love, laughter, and silence; and as void-fillers they go a
long way. But there are other things for the chinks. For I can read a
little and write a little, and think a little, as against the black
idleness of those three years. And beauty—wind in the tree-tops, the
arching blue, the flicker of light and shade—beauty everywhere, in
fact; and back of beauty the Thought that designed both it and the eyes
to see it. Oh, it is a beautiful world! And though one’s body lies idle,
one’s thoughts may go everywhere, and are everywhere at home. And may
not endurance itself, however passive, yet rise to the point of
achievement, if only one endure in the right way? And if liberty be
measured by one’s capacity to do without—oh, how can any walls of
suffering shut one in when the way up is always open—up, to the
presence of God?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 28th._ Whenever I think I’ve overcome a temptation, and can afford
to rest, something else comes pouncing and catches me napping. This time
it was Cousin Jane. I’m not a bit sorry I sent her home—it was high
time for her to go. But I needn’t have been so blazing mad when I did
it.

She hasn’t been near me for ages, but she came at last, exactly when she
very specially should have kept away. So as I lay there on the porch
sofa—for I couldn’t get out in the yard this week—I heard the familiar
pile-driver tread, and opened my eyes to behold her at the corner of the
porch, personified virtue, somewhat overheated by the afternoon sun, and
looking rather limp about the collar. But there was nothing limp about
her stolid mouth, nor in her hard black eyes. She had come for a
purpose, and was not displeased to think I wouldn’t enjoy it.

I’ve been afraid of Cousin Jane all my life. I used to run at the sound
of her voice when I was a child at Cedarhurst. More than once I have
been gently, but firmly, extracted from a closet by Great-aunt Letitia,
and led to her presence to perform the rites required by politeness to
even the most unpleasant kin. Somehow it all came back to me—the
childish, unreasoning fear. I was so weak, the pain so biting sharp; I
could not bear unkindness, too. I turned my head toward the long windows
with a wild thought of escape; but when my heart is like this, I can
scarcely walk, and I could never have reached my room. Besides, she
would come after me: so I made a virtue of necessity and lifted my hand.
She saved me the trouble of speaking.

“Good land alive, Lyddy! Are you mopin’ around yet, makin’ out like
you’re half dead? I wonder John Bird doesn’t go crazy! I heard you were
rompin’ all over the place, throwin’ the birds enough biscuit to feed
all the poor folks in town, if you only had religion enough to think
about them instead of your own silly whims.”

She came close and settled herself heavily in the Peon’s chair, waving
her fan vigorously. She reached across me to the stand on the other
side, and rang my bell sharply. Josie appeared at once.

“Go draw me some fresh water, straight out of the well,” she commanded.
It was one of her hobbies to ignore the Peon’s water system, and to
assume that we depended on a well and a windlass, as she boasted that
she still did herself.

“Wouldn’t you rather have a glass of lemonade?” I inquired. “And bring
some wafers, Josie.”

Josie’s mother makes wonderful old-time wafers, as thin as paper and as
crisp as frosty air. They are beautifully rolled, and melt in one’s
mouth: no other cook in the county can achieve them. Cousin Jane ate the
entire plateful, and her manner, as she turned to me once more, was a
shade less like that of a regiment charging a redoubt.

“What did David go off for?” she demanded. “Have you and John Bird
turned him loose? I can’t get a thing out of Caroline, and I know
something’s wrong somewhere. What is it?”

“He went to look after some business,” I said.

“Oh, you can tell that to the neighbors that ain’t kin,” she said
scornfully. “I want to know what’s wrong. He’s done somethin’, I know,
an’ Caroline’s ashamed of it. I can’t get a thing out of her, but she’s
a changed girl. An’ more than that, she’s standin’ in her own light.
She’s that flighty an’ cross Bob White looks like he don’t know what to
make of it. Men ain’t goin’ to stand too much foolishness, an’ first
news you know, Caroline can’t get him if she wants him. I’m talkin’
plain, but it’s time.”

“Why don’t you talk to Caro?” I suggested.

“Good land, Lyddy, do you reckon I ain’t? But it’s like water on a
duck’s back—in one ear and out the other. An’ besides”—with a sudden
deep craft in her beady eyes—“you have to be careful with girls—at
least, a person with tact does. I don’t come right out with things to
Caroline, like you would. But I just thought I’d get together all the
things David’s been doin’ an’ lay ’em before her. I don’t suppose you
let her know the half of it, whatever it was. Was it somethin’ about
money, or has he been getting into fast ways, drinkin’, or playin’
cards, or—worse? I always knew he would get into mischief sooner or
later—he pretends to be so steady: I’ve just been waitin’ for it to
come. Why, what’s the matter, Lyddy? What do you want?”

I sat straight up and rang the bell. Josie ran out.

“Get me my chair, Josie, quick,” I said. She whirled it to my side, and
I stepped in unaided.

“Take me to my room,” I told her, “and leave me there while you tell
Uncle Milton to get Mrs. Grackle’s buggy and to open the gate for her.
She is going home at once. Then come back and help me to bed. Do not
come back until I send for you, Cousin Jane: I am not well.”

She stared at me, speechless and apoplectic, and as Josie arranged my
pillows I saw her driving between the cedars. And above all my anger
about David and my consciousness that Great-aunt Letitia would be
ashamed of me, above the weakness, and above the tearing, throbbing
pain, is the exhilaration of knowing that for once in my life I wasn’t
afraid of Cousin Jane. I never will be afraid of her again!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_May 31st._ Trying all one’s life to see things from other peoples’
point of view has this advantage in sickness: it helps one to stand
apart from the suffering and to look at it from without, even when
whelmed in it, and almost overwhelmed. One sees it as if it were someone
else’s sickness, taking the long view of it, as a doctor does. He is
sorry for the pain, of course; he knows it is bad. But he expects it.
And he expects the backsets, and the blues, and the
can-I-ever-get-wells, and all the rest of it. Those things are part of
the process of recovery, and do not affect the final outcome. Once past
a certain point, the road leads inevitably to one sure goal; the
windings in and out don’t count, nor the ups and downs; one is advancing
all the time. Now, if a doctor, who doesn’t need it, can get that
comfort out of my aches and pains, why shouldn’t I get it, who need it
so much?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 1st._ Out under the maple again today, and the stars in their
courses fighting for me! And why, when a miracle like this happens for
Milly and Bobolink, should I despair of David and Caro?

Milly came to see me to have that long talk she spoke about. She had
been telephoning every day to know when she could come, so I had Josie
call her the moment I found I could go out. And just suppose I had been
well enough yesterday—what a misfortune that would have been!

She scattered the crumbs for me, and settled beside me to pour out what
Caro calls “her uncle-ish woes;” and while she was doing it, the
wood-thrush flew down, only to be shouldered away from the feast by a
mannerless jay. Somehow it made me feel perfectly hopeless about Milly,
poor little soft, sweet thing, and my eyes filled up with tears; but
when I had winked them dry, the thrush went back. The jay pecked at him
savagely, and he dashed half-way round the hydrangeas in terror. Milly
saw him and caught her breath.

“Uncle Jason _is_ like that,” she said, with a little catch in her
voice; “and I can’t stand against him—I can’t! Don’t you see how
helpless the thrush is, Cousin Lil?”

But the thrush had stopped in mid-flight. His breast was puffed out like
a tiny balloon, the trembling of his legs plain to be seen; he quivered
from head to foot. But he turned slowly, his legs shaking under him, and
hopped deliberately toward his tormentor, his head high, his swollen
breast making a ruff of feathers visible on either side of his back. He
went close to the jay and pecked toward him in the air. The jay,
startled, gave back an inch. The thrush, still trembling, hopped nearer
and pecked, as steadily as if his legs were in their normal condition.
The bully backed again. The thrush hopped and pecked.

Milly had leaned forward, her hand on mine. Her face was white and she
was breathing quickly.

The jay continued to back. The wood-thrush followed him, inch by inch,
unyielding, yet in mortal fear. At last the big coward could stand it no
longer. He spread his wings and vanished across the brook. The thrush
stood trembling a moment, his feathers slowly flattening along his
sides, and then returned quietly to his lunch. Milly rose, a new light
in her soft eyes.

“If he can, I can,” she said steadily. “I don’t need to talk any more,
Cousin Lil: I’m going home and _do_.”




                                   X
                       THE ROUTING OF UNCLE JASON


_June 2nd._ I’m afraid I haven’t inherited the family grace of
hospitality; for the further I get from Cousin Jane’s visit the more
glad I am that I sent her home. And it isn’t all on David’s account
either, though I could never have done it but for what she said of him.
Yet since it is done I remember her life-time disregard of the small
courtesies of life. I wonder if it were not more cowardice in me than
kindness that for so long I meekly allowed it, and thereby encouraged
her, so far as lay in my power, to ride rough-shod over all the rules of
politeness.

I do believe that decent manners, even to one’s junior kinfolks, are an
essential part of decent morals; one can commit as dastardly crimes with
an ill-tempered tongue as with a lying one. And what right has she to
plume herself on her frankness, as if that were a justification for such
ill manners as cut the joy and fellowship of life at the root? I think
our ideas of morals need standardizing, at least to the point where we
can no longer, by bad temper and worse behavior, inflict misery at will
on those about us, sowing on every side the seeds of anger or contempt,
and yet remain a highly respected member of society and a shining light
in the church.—Yet, after all, I’m making a deal of a pother about
trifles. It is what we do ourselves that counts, not what is done to us.
In the face of the void, at the land’s end, the hurts one has suffered
will disappear; it is the hurts one has inflicted that will be lions in
the way. And if I have really hurt Cousin Jane—well, when I’m a little
stronger I’ll try my best to get straight with her. For the present, I
am here in bed again, with the birds outside for company—and a visit
from Caro to look forward to. She telephoned a while ago that she had
been spending the night with Milly and would be over before lunch. So
Cousin Jason hasn’t annihilated the child, at least.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 3rd._ Milly really did go home and begin. She went by for Caro
yesterday afternoon on her way home, and they found Cousin Jason in a
thunderous mood. Milly was quietly determined. He had left the breakfast
table that morning in a temper, after his frequent fashion: and Milly,
in her brand-new fashion, had refrained from running after him and
imploring him to have pity on his poor head, and drink his coffee. He
had fumed around on the porches for some time, waiting for her to take
her cue, and had finally disappeared. He came back at eleven with a
headache, slamming all the doors, notwithstanding, and demanded hot
coffee at once. Milly, however, had forseen this contingency and
prepared for it. The cook’s daughter was ill, and she had allowed her to
go down there as soon as breakfast was over and stay until time to cook
dinner. It was the housemaid’s regular day off, and she had already
departed, not to return until the late afternoon. As Uncle Jason had
ordered cold lunches for the summer, the girl had fixed everything for
him, and left it in the refrigerator. Joe, the house man, would serve
it. Milly herself, who was just leaving the house as her uncle came in,
had an engagement in Chatterton for lunch and must hurry; but if he
wanted coffee Joe could make a fire for him, though he could not brew
any drinkable beverage. But Uncle Jason had always said he could make
better coffee than her mother’s cooks, and it would take only a few
minutes. It was too bad about the headache; he should have taken his
coffee at breakfast. And Milly drove off, a vision of gentle serenity,
and left him gasping in the hall.

Caro went back with her in time for dinner. Milly had passed the pale
stage and was in unwonted and most becoming excitement. Caro, of course,
was enraptured with the whole situation. She is the only soul alive who
ever held Cousin Jason in check; and now she infuriated him with her
innocent remarks, and made him laugh the next moment in spite of
himself, which made him more furious still. After dinner they retired to
Milly’s room and discussed Bobolink’s perfections—and David’s, I
wonder?—until the latest of late bedtimes.

At breakfast Cousin Jason was more than crabbed; but he drank the last
of his coffee, and made quite a hearty meal before pronouncing the very
excellent waffles unfit for human consumption and slamming the
dining-room door after him as he went out. Caro had then seen Milly off
to the city, where she was to do a little shopping and “take a bobolink
lunch,” and would go back to spend the night with her.

Caro will stay there all the time Grace is away. She is in the highest
of spirits over the prospect, not only because a battle with Cousin
Jason has been one of her life-long desires; but because she is more
than weary of Cousin Jane, and her blunderbuss manner of forcing
conversation anent Bob White. Caro won’t say much about it—for fear, I
devoutly hope, that I may draw inferences in David’s favor; but she is
unconcealably bored with Bob, and his money, and his pedigree and
connections, clear back to Noah. I doubt if the boy ever had a chance
with her; but if he had—or would have had without Cousin Jane’s
disastrous approval of him—it is only a might-have-been henceforth. I
feel a little sorry for him, but not much. He was crazy about Olive
Wilson last year, and will be crazy about somebody else before long.
He’s one of those fellows who find a pretty girl a necessary adjunct to
life, and if one can’t be had, he will cheerfully and whole-heartedly
look for another. When he gets her, he will settle down with her
contentedly, and make a devoted and exemplary spouse.

Of course I keep David posted. And of course he wants me to. But he
never alludes to Caro in his letters, which are long and interesting,
and determinedly cheerful. The little sinner asks for them unblushingly
every time she comes over, and is delighted that “dear David” is
enjoying himself so, and is so in love with the West. She is
ostentatiously fond of him, in a lofty, elder-sisterly manner, and makes
frequent inquiries about his health, which appears to be unromantically
robust. I cannot see the slightest change in her, except for a
wistfulness in her pretty eyes, when she has to say good-bye and go
away; and sometimes a fleeting quiver in her smile when she finds me
back in bed, as she has done so often of late. I am glad we are to leave
together soon, for I can scarcely bear this continual sending her away.
I don’t think she can mind going, busy and active as she is, as I mind
having her go. I really am a very old lady to be so upset with youthful
love affairs: I’m positively decrepit. But if one will have the fun of
having children, I suppose one must pay the piper sometimes.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 6th._ I think I am learning the art of living; and isn’t that
worth a bit of pain? It is to discover the best in the present moment,
though it be no larger than a needle in a haystack, and getting the good
of it while one has it. One can relax one’s mind by force of will, and
hold it open to small pleasures and tiny interests; and such little
things may become one’s salvation in desperate straits! I think that is
one of life’s greatest needs, especially as one grows older, or if one
is ill—that one should guard and cherish the capacity for enjoyment of
trifles. It is to the soul what elasticity of the arteries is to the
body; for through it the currents of our thoughts and feelings run in
swift and wholesome tides, to the upbuilding of the inner life.

And there’s always something. Though the children have run away, I have
the birds.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 7th._ Milly has crossed her Rubicon, sure enough. I was propped up
in bed yesterday evening, with my tray before me, and the Peon was
eating his dinner from a flower-garnished table beside me, when there
came a sudden gust of laughter in the hall, and a moment later she and
Caro came in the room.

“Oh, Mammy Lil, won’t you please give us something to eat?” Caro
besought. “Just a bite of your fried chicken, Daddy Jack, for two
beautiful damsels in distress; and a pinch of oats or something for a
poor little pin-feathered bird we’ve got in the hall that’s most mad
enough to chew nails—or would be if he were not a saint.”

“Mr. Lincoln is in the parlor, Cousin John,” said Milly. “We don’t want
any dinner, of course—he’s going back to town in a few minutes; he just
drove us over from home. We want to stay all night—Caro and I.”

The Peon was already in the hall. Milly looked wonderfully pretty, with
that light in her eyes, and a soft color in her cheeks, like fire behind
a pearl.

“Indeed we do want dinner!” exclaimed Caro. “Come along and help me
forage. There’s no use in Bobolink’s going back. He can stay at the
hotel in Chatterton tonight, and get back in plenty of time for his
business in the morning.—Poor Mammy Lil! We’re not telling you a thing;
but I’ll come back in a minute with the whole tale, as soon as I get
dinner started.”

She dropped a kiss on the end of my nose—her favorite spot for such
attentions—and went out, drawing Milly after her. I heard them in the
dining-room with the servants, and then Caro’s gay voice in the parlor a
moment; and then she came back to me. She picked a drumstick from the
Peon’s dish, and sat on my bed gnawing it, joyfully reminiscent of her
recent adventures.

“Mammy Lil,” she began impressively, “jay-baiting is the grandest sport
ever invented. Milly doesn’t appreciate the fun of it as much as she
might, but she’s dead game; and I’ve been having the time of my life.”

“It’s too bad that Mr. Lincoln couldn’t have been kept free from it,
dear. How did that happen?”

“Why, that wasn’t our fault at all. He often comes out in the afternoon
and takes Milly out in his car. Then he goes to the hotel in Chatterton
for supper, and comes back for the evening. He hardly ever sees Cousin
Jay, and when he does, there’s never been any trouble since that time
Milly told you about; she’s made him leave at half-past nine ever since.

“They came back early from their drive because I was to be there, and he
stopped for a little visit before dinner. He doesn’t stop usually—they
stay out till the last minute; and Cousin Jay just jumped to the
conclusion Milly had asked him to dinner. We have been teaching Cousin
Jay to eat all the breakfast he wants before he leaves the table, and
one or two other things, too. If he’s too horrid at dinner we go to our
room afterward, and leave him all the evening with nobody to quarrel at.
And I suppose he just meant to get even. He came out and told Milly and
me to go in the house and get ready for dinner, for he was tired of
waiting for us. And then he turned around to Mr. Lincoln—he hadn’t
spoken to him at all—and said, ‘It’s time for you to be going, young
man, and you needn’t come back after supper. I’m tired of your hanging
around here.’ And then he turned on his heel and walked to the house.
Oh, I was so mad I could hear my hair crackle! Just feel how crisped-up
and woolly it is.”

She bent forward on the bed and pushed her soft curls under my hand,
burrowing her nose in the covers.

“What did Mr. Lincoln do?”

“Just behaved like an angel. He didn’t have a thought but for Milly. He
forgot all about me, and spoke to her as if they were alone. Mammy Lil,
that man’s sweet. He’ll do for Milly, and I told him so afterwards. But
Milly was a perfect joy. She gave Bobolink one adoring look. It went to
my very toes, so I don’t know what it did to him; and then she said, in
the quietest way:

“Won’t you stay here for a few minutes and wait for me? I’m coming
back.”

“And he said he’d wait till doomsday, of course! and she took my hand
without a word, and into the house we went. It wasn’t nearly dinner
time. We went by the back way, and she stopped in the kitchen long
enough to tell Jule she wouldn’t be home for several days, and what to
do for Cousin Jason. Then we went upstairs and packed a couple of
suitcases, and I called Joe to take them down stairs. We all went down
the front way, and there he was in the hall.”

“‘What the deuce are you doing?’ he snapped.

“‘I’m going out of this house,’ said Milly, as quietly as if she’d said
she were going out on the porch; ‘and I’m not coming back till you learn
your place in it.’

“‘I reckon you’ll learn some sense when your mother comes home,’ he
sneered. ‘Go play the fool if you want to.’

“Milly didn’t seem to hear him; and somehow that still, deep anger of
hers made me ashamed to sputter, so I never said a word. He slammed the
door behind us, and we all got in Bobolink’s car and came over.

“Milly told him what she had said to Cousin Jay, and they fixed
everything in two minutes. Milly won’t write a word to Cousin Grace,
because she’s just obliged to stay with old Mrs. Wood till her daughter
gets back, and there’s no use in worrying her. I know you’ll let Milly
stay here; and when Cousin Grace comes back, if she’ll make Cousin Jay
behave, or go away, Milly will go home and wait to be married till her
mother wishes. But if Cousin Grace won’t stop him, Milly’s going to
marry Bobolink right off, in church, with just the clothes she has. And
I think she’s exactly right.”

“She’s right to come here and wait for Grace to settle it,” I said; “and
Grace will settle it right, I know.”

But I was half afraid, even as I said it. Cousin Jason has bent Grace
like a reed from her babyhood, and almost—perhaps not quite—broken
her. Could she stand against him, even if she would?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 9th._ Could she indeed? As if love couldn’t set the gentlest face
like a flint!

We were all in here this morning, Milly and Caro both busy with a lace-y
frock for the bride-to-be—“just in case she has to be a bride next
week”—when I saw Grace driving up. I did not tell them she was coming,
and her arms were around Milly before the child knew she was there.

“You darling!” said Grace; “you’ll have to forgive me dear, as Robert
has done. He’s coming out this afternoon to take dinner and spend the
night.”

Milly gave a little gasp, and then dropped her head on her mother’s
shoulder and began to cry. Caro snatched up the filmy stuff they were
working on, threw it over Milly like a bridal veil, and pirouetted
around the two, crooning the dolefulest tune imaginable, her eyes
dancing with fun. Grace looked up.

“Don’t stop petting Milly a minute,” Caro exhorted; “she’s a perfect
heroine, and Bobolink’s a dear. I’m just singing a requiem for my
jay-bird kin.”

“But, Mother,” asked Milly, sitting up, “how ever did you hear about it?
And how did you happen to come home so soon? And when did you
see—Robert?” She blushed beautifully as she called his name.

“Your uncle telephoned me night before last. I knew he had everything
wrong, of course; but I was sure that enough was the matter for me to
come home and see about it. It was all right to leave Mother, for Annie
promised to stay, and Mary is coming the last of the week. So I
telephoned Robert to meet me in town yesterday at twelve o’clock. I
stayed there last night because there were several things to do in
taking business affairs into my own hands again; and before I saw
Brother Jason I had to think out clearly what I wished to say.”

“Have you seen him?”

“Yes, I went there first this morning.” She hesitated, a troubled look
in her eyes. Milly drew her closer.

“Poor mother!” she said.

“It is your uncle who needs sympathy, dear, though he will not have it.
And I know it is partly my fault, and partly the whole family’s, as well
as his. We have all given up to him all our lives, under color of being
kind and patient and magnanimous, and all that, when at the bottom we
were just afraid to oppose him; and he—suffers.”

“O, Mother, I’m sorry!” cried Milly. “I’ll give up!”

“Now, Cousin Grace, I call that a shame,” broke in Caro. “No matter what
you and Milly do, you make a fault and a penance out of it to shield him
and hurt yourselves. It isn’t fair. He knows he’s outrageous, and he
doesn’t care; and I just think he ought to be hurt, to find out what
he’s been doing to other people. If he’s gone, do let Milly enjoy
herself, for once. But is he gone, really?”

“He’s going,” said Grace. “I wanted him to stay, as my guest, and not as
the master of the house. But he—he was very angry. He is to leave this
morning, while I am here. He’s going back to his own house and live
there all alone.”

“And a mighty good thing for him,” declared Caro. “When I used to
indulge in tantrums like his, Mammy Lil always made me go stay by myself
till I was what she called a social creature. I think I’ll go over and
see Cousin Jason and tell him about it. I could always come back the
second I was willing to be polite, and so can he. Think of Cousin
Jason’s emerging a social creature! Butterflies and caterpillars won’t
be in it. But if Milly isn’t to be married next week, when do we begin
on the trousseau?”

The talk passed into a discussion of clothes, and drifted about that
interesting topic till time for them to go home. They found their house
empty, except for the servants. Cousin Jason had gone, as he said,
without eating again beneath his sister’s roof.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 16th._ I suppose the excitement of Cousin Jason’s deposition was a
little too much for me: I’ve been curled up dead-’possum-fashion for a
week. Now I’m uncurling again, and showing that, like the ’possum, I’m
not so dead as I look. Caro came back, whether or no, and took charge of
me. It is a great comfort to have her.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 19th._ A slow pull and a hard one. But I make it, inch by inch.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 21st._ Courage, patience and laughter—life would be impossible
without them. Yet the first necessity, and the last, is love. If one
only loves enough, one can fight anything, and fight always, while
breath and consciousness last.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_June 24th._

            _WHEN WINGS GO BY_

    _A flash of wings across my window-pane!_
    _Fallen these narrow walls; and sky-arched plain,_
    _Fern-haunted pool, white foam of summer seas,_
    _Blue, dawn-steeped mountains, dusk of forest trees—_
    _All things free wings may seek, or near or far—_
    _Sweep round this bed, where pain and stillness are._
    _A prisoned life? When any moment brings_
    _A far horizon, and the sense of wings?_




                                   XI
                      WHERE THE BATTLE WAS FOUGHT


_July 7th._ I have seen the woods in summer time again! It was winter
when I left home for those three years, and winter when I went back;
and, though one does not think of the country passed in a winter journey
as dead—for the winter’s story of life reserved is as vivid as the
summer one of life out-poured—yet one longs to see, far out-spread in
breeze and sunshine, the close-shut life of the winter buds.

As soon as the doctor would allow it, the Peon and Caro brought me here.
We came through the mountains nearly all the way—one long splendor of
rhododendrons, wild phlox, azaleas, laurel, and briar rose, all in
glorious bloom; and above them the green billows of the trees, with
great masses of chestnut blooms for foam. And everywhere the mountains
themselves, green and dark near at hand, and blue and faint in the
distance; and between them the valleys, heaped with beauty and
over-flowing with life.

The Boss and the Madam met us in Baltimore, and brought us to this
heavenly place. My room is downstairs, with windows on three sides, and
wide doors opening on a quiet end of the wide piazza, which nearly
encircles the house. I can be wheeled there, straight from the bed, to a
couch-like hammock, where a cranky back may be as comfortable as its own
bad temper will allow; and my bed is under a long row of windows, just
as it is at home. I can look out across the small plateau, occupied by
the cottage grounds, to mountains, near and far, and to the glory of the
sunset skies. And again, from the porch, on mountains, and slopes where
the summer cottagers have set their beautiful homes.

I was ashamed to come here in this battered condition; when the Madam
wrote for us I expected to be walking all about by the time I came. But
they would have me, and the Peon and Caro were of the same mind. For
myself, I can scarcely imagine a lovelier place to get well in; the
loving-kindness indoors is as fine a tonic as the mountain air outside.

I have not seen any of the Peon’s family in all these years of my
invalidism, but I find them in spirit just where I left them—and in
body, too, for that matter; for health and love and happiness are a
combination to defy time, and the heads of the household are still a
bridal pair. Their youthful names for one another, long since adopted by
the rest of us, suit their sunny middle-age as well as ever; so the
“Boss” and the “Madam” they remain.

One of the daughters is married, and will make but a brief visit this
summer. The other, known as Hazel-eyes, is the light of the big house; a
quiet little body, wonderfully pretty, her mother’s shadow and her
father’s adorer.

The Peon stayed only a couple of days, and went back to our empty nest.
He is to go West before long, and will come here on his return to tell
me all about David.

Caro is restless and unusually silent, not doing herself justice among
strangers. The child has been severely taxed in the last few weeks, and
shows it plainly. The roses are all gone, and her eyes are tired and
sad. She seems like a new Caro whom I must learn to know. I know I was
ill for awhile, though not as ill as they thought; and she never saw me
suffer that way before. But it isn’t that which clouds her bright
eyes—it can’t be, no matter what she says, now that I am past the worst
of it. I wonder will she ever open her heart to me about David. She used
to tell me everything. I always said the test of my success in mothering
her would come with her falling in love; if she came to me with that, I
would know I had done my work aright. And now I see that I have failed.
If I had been her real mother I would have known better how to reach
her. It is a real motherhood to me, of course, but not to Caro—and
perhaps not even to David. So I must lie here and wait, like any other
outsider, till everybody knows how it turns out.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 9th._ Yesterday Caro wheeled me out to the line of locusts, which
cuts this plateau in half and divides the Boss’s grounds from his
neighbor’s. A song sparrow came to call at once, a dear little fellow,
all streaks and music. They sing here all day long—they and the winter
wrens.

A flicker has a clamorous brood in the tallest locust; they cry every
moment, except when their wail is gagged by a worm. Their parents toil
incessantly, but I should think their nerves would be on edge. The
bluebird mothers, too, are hard at work, for there are dozens of
bluebird babies to feed, and bluebird fathers never turn a wing or lend
a bill to their upbringing. The babies are cunning, speckled things,
their big round eyes ringed with white, giving them an expression of
child-like wonder.

This afternoon I am out on my end of the porch, in the hammock. Caro has
gone with Hazel-eyes and a party of young folks on an expedition to Bare
Rock—a great shelf of granite which juts out near the top of the
mountain to the north of us, and from which there is a wonderful view.
The Madam is entertaining visitors on the other side of the porch, and I
am finding the solitude I need a constant temptation to Grumpyish
thoughts.

When one wants to bog down, there are always such unassailable reasons
for doing it! I have faced Grumpy down and out about the pain. And I’ve
done fairly well about the idleness; that isn’t a losing fight, at
least. But I’m just bowled over about the children. And it isn’t
altogether that they’re suffering, though that hurts. It’s because
they’re suffering away from me, and I can’t do anything until they
choose to take me into their confidence.

I’ve been lying here thinking how Grumpy must be enjoying my
back-sliding till I’ve made up my mind to fight him to a finish on this
also. They have a right to their secrets and to their own lives; it’s
the right and natural way. I never repaid Great-aunt Letitia’s love to
her, any more than she repaid her mother’s. You don’t pay love back; you
pay it forward. The great-aunts paid their love-debt, not to their
mother, but to me; and I’ve paid what I owed them to David and Caro; and
Caro and David won’t pay to me—they can’t; they’ll pay it to children
yet unborn. Why can’t I accept the law, and be glad? It’s trying to grab
what isn’t one’s share that makes all the trouble in life, anyway. I’ve
always said the most secure possession was the one carried in an open
handle and free to fly at a breath: I’ll carry the children that way
now. And for amusement, there are still the birds.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 10th._ As I lay on the porch this afternoon, facing the great
mountain to the north, the long fingers of the westering light touched
the foamy white tops of the chestnut trees, still crowned with their
mist of bloom. The light slid across the hollows of the mountain-side,
filling the long curves with dark green shadows, a soft, deep background
for the maples of the nearer lawns, all golden green in the full
sunlight, and for the silver of the wind-ruffled poplars. Locust trees
are on every side, a survival of the native forests. Where the light is
reflected from their leaves, they are a dark bluish green; but where the
sun strikes through them, each leaflet is shining gold, and the long
leaves sway at the end of every branch like giant fronds gleaming under
some Midas touch.

But even the locusts are far away, across the many-acred lawn. The trees
near the house are too young and small to shelter birds; and if I go out
to the locusts their foliage is too light and too high to shade my eyes
from the glare: so I have been missing the birds. If I could stay with
the others it wouldn’t matter; but I must lie alone, and in silence,
resting between lines when I write; and Grumpy is boring company. So
I’ve been casting envious looks at a place across the road. A long hedge
of blossoming privet hides everything but the tree-tops, but there are
dozens of them; and wings flash in and out. It is a large place, larger
than this; I know there’s a corner in it there I wouldn’t be in the way.
The sense of something near and unknown, yet knowable, draws me daily.
The Garden of Delight I call it, and listen for the songs which float
from it, and long for its shade and sunshine.

When the Madam came to sit with me I confessed my daft condition to her,
and she went across the road to the Garden’s owners—two ladies who are
friends of hers—and returned presently with the freedom of the Garden
for me and my chair. I am to go tomorrow.

I wonder sometimes if people dream of the pleasure they can give through
little things. To these ladies I suppose their bit of hospitality is a
trifle soon forgotten; but to me it is pure delight. It will hearten me
for my fight a thousand times, and lift me clear above the pain a
thousand more. It is hard to keep steady when one is so happy. The long,
filmy curves of wind-swept silver in the evening sky grow suddenly dim;
and when they wheel me back to bed I am “fair lifted,” as the Scotch
say, and wait joyfully in the darkness for such sleep as night may
bring.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 11th._ The Garden of Delight! A close-shaven sward from which the
tiniest bird stands up distinctly; and trees, and trees, and trees!
Shrubs and vines, rose-beds, azaleas, tall altheas, clumps of iris,
masses of old-fashioned lilies, tangles of honeysuckles on the fences,
beds of early phlox, ragged robins, larkspur, and ferns—all things cool
and quiet and sweet. In the dense shade of tall shrubs they have left
me, the feathery locusts waving overhead, and before me a hitherto
unsuspected vista of beauty—the long, long valley which leads to
Gettysburg, with the mountains guarding it on either side.

Beyond the greensward lies a beautiful bit of wilderness—ferns and wild
flowers under thick-set trees; beyond that, close-shaven grass again,
then a bit of clover, and a tangle out of the very heart of the woods.
And everywhere are birds. And I, who have longed for the woods for
years, and who have never dreamed of finding them outside of the land of
Make-Believe, I am here, far off, a thousand miles from everywhere,
alone with the sky and the winds and the wild mountains, in a silence of
upper air! One can bear one’s body in a place like this: it doesn’t
matter that it cannot run, nor walk. One’s mind can run, and fly, and
rise so high that the pain lies far below, lost, vanished, like a pebble
in the valley when one looks from a free mountain peak against the sky.
For one glorious hour I have run away from it—this pain that wrenches
and grips; I have been free, free! And so my hope grows bold, and I
reach out to touch that happy future when I shall be free in body as
well as in mind: it will come—some day!

And oh, foolish one, remember, and learn! For the Garden of Delight was
close at hand all the time, only I hadn’t the wit to reach it till my
body was carried thither. But there is always a Garden, if one can find
it—a Garden of Delight, hidden behind the hedge!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 15th._ The birds are not kind today, even here in the Garden. It
is a grey evening, for one thing, and the light is bad for spying out
secrets among the leaves. The weather is misty and damp, promising the
rain we need; but everything is dry from recent heat, and the insects
may be less juicy than usual, and not very tempting eating. Anyway, the
birds are not here.

The mist, with the dim light of the evening sun upon it, spreads a film
of silver over the blues and greens of the mountains. Down in the valley
it deepens till all the colors are faint and soft, from the pale stubble
of the nearer wheatfields all up the long valley between the mountains,
to where the dim blue of the great battlefield melts into the dim blue
of the sky above it.

It was down this Valley, over the road at my feet, that the men of the
Southern army tramped after the battle was lost. My own kinsmen were
there, following their great leader with the rest, as he passed through
the Valley of Defeat. How much seemed lost to them, who can say? But to
us of a later generation how plain it is that nothing was lost at
Gettysburg which it were well to keep. The really priceless thing they
brought away unharmed—the courage which could accept defeat, and turn,
without a murmur, in the wreck of the old order, to the upbuilding of a
new world. That was a struggle which the world even now knows little of,
though it was as wide as the South and as long as a generation’s
life-time. It was fought singly, and in silence, in each individual
life. Each soul bled inwardly, and only God saw the wounds. But I have
sprung from men who fought that fight. Let me look at the Valley, and
learn.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 18th._ The wind is at play in the mountains today, and sweeps up
the Valley with a sound as of rushing waters, bending the trees before
it. The long shadows under the swaying branches know not a moment’s
rest; and the racing clouds shift the shafts of sunlight so rapidly from
place to place that the very earth seems moving, like the lightest leaf.
Few birds are abroad, save the robins, which battle against the unseen
powers of the air, only to be blown like autumn leaves. A thrasher,
dashed suddenly in front of me, began at once a philosophic hunt for
worms—one place was as good as another, no doubt; but a young robin,
the black of his crown still separated from the dark ear-coverts by
bands of gray, crouches frightened where he falls. His half-drooped
wings show a power which explains his venturing abroad; he is full
grown, though not yet in full robin dress. He is learning the old lesson
of the young: that there are things in life which not even grown-ups can
do; and that his liberty is merely a liberty to adjust himself to forces
which he cannot hope to control. No wonder he looks a bit dazed!

The Mistress of the Garden comes out presently to look after her
flowers. Her face is good to see, and her voice to listen to. Her eyes
have the look of one who dwells in that place of peace where happiness
and sorrow are fused into one, and are known as equal essentials of the
highest joy. She is a lover of Nature, too. One inevitably comes to be,
I think, as one travels the long road to serenity of soul. One may
observe Nature in youth, no doubt, and love it, too, somewhat; but the
real sense of kinship with it is a matter of living, and of growth.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 25th._ Blessed be trees and sunshine, the open sky, and the free
winds which fill it! And blessed be the freshness and promise of the new
day, coming alike to the light-hearted and to those pain-weary and
discouraged.

And the promise never fails. For, whether the new day brings escape or
courage, relief or a growing power of patience, whether it means joy or
peace, it brings good, and only good; and so through all the soul its
_sursum corda_ rings with sweetness and command.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_July 28th._ After wheeling me over to the Garden yesterday afternoon,
Caro left me, to join in an expedition to Bare Rock. When she had gone,
I discovered to my horror that I had been deposited beneath the branch
of a poplar tree on which some hundreds of caterpillars had just been
hatched out. They were so thick that heads, tails and sides touched
everywhere, as they lay on leaves and stems; not one could move a hair’s
breadth without knocking off the others or climbing over them. What they
thought of my proximity I had no means of finding out; but for me it was
not a joyful occasion. I could move neither my chair nor myself; so I
lay there, gazing up at the wretched things till I began turning into a
caterpillar myself, and felt fuzz and wriggles sprouting all over me.
But before the transformation was too far advanced to be checked, I
heard Caro’s voice behind me.

“Mammy Lil, I don’t want to go walking. May I stay and talk to you?”

I had been feeling specially lonesome of late. I kept telling myself I
was getting morbid from long illness and solitude; but it seemed to me
that Caro almost avoided me. She waited on me most thoughtfully; but her
errands done, she disappeared. There was no more of that dear
companionship, when she used to sit near me, reading, or embroidering,
while she sang dreamily to herself, or cuddled her head against mine on
the pillows in a fellowship which needed no words. Children can’t
possibly understand how bereft one feels, shut out. I knew she loved me
too well to hurt me; yet I had missed her, under the same roof with her,
more than I had missed David far away: the boy had never shut me out
like that.

But her voice was different as she asked her question now. I remembered
how, years ago, she used to come out of her periods of seclusion in the
parlor “nice and social,” as she would sweetly announce, and confess her
little soul inside out, clear to her very toes. Before I saw her face I
knew the barrier was gone, and I was to have her confidence at last.

But, first of all, I craved deliverance from the caterpillars. Some of
them had hunched themselves up ominously, as if they were about to jump
down and float across my nose on silken threads. I was very unhappy
indeed.

Caro squealed in horror when she saw my plight, and snatched me back
from my impending doom. She wheeled me across the shaven grass to the
edge of the wood-tangle, and sat on a rock beside me, facing the long
Valley once filled with marching men—men who marched from the disaster
of outward defeat to the victory of inner conquest.

“Mammy Lil,” she inquired presently, “do you love me any more at all?”

I turned my face to her without speaking. Her eyes filled with sudden
tears, and she laid her cheek against my hand.

“You’re the darlingest mother! If you weren’t, I’d be ashamed to tell
you. Mammy Lil, I’ve wished sometimes I could murder myself, this last
year; I’ve been so cross. It began last summer while I was home on
vacation. Everybody in Chatterton made love to Milly or me last summer,
except David. He was just as he always was—sweet to both of us, but
specially careful of me because he was my brother. And I didn’t feel the
same to him at all. I—Mammy Lil, I was as foolish about David as those
boys were about us two girls: I was in love with him, over head and
ears.” She paused while I stroked her hair.

“You can’t think how ashamed I was. And of course I treated him like a
yellow dog. And he behaved _perfectly_. I was sure, though, that he
didn’t suspect—he, nor any one else. And then, at the end of the
summer, Cousin Jane told me that David and I were to marry. I didn’t
believe you’d ever talked to her about it, of course; but I saw in a
flash what it would mean to you—and that David might do it to please
you. And I was afraid Cousin Jane suspected what a fool I was. And she
went to David, too, and told me that, and told him she’d told me. I did
want to wring Cousin Jane’s neck; and I think yet she deserved it!

“David and I had a talk. She just butted our heads together till we had
to. He said he’d always cared; but he had made up his mind to wait till
I was through school and you were at home again: it wasn’t fair not to.
He was lovely. But he was so quiet—and so confident, it seemed to me. I
tried to lay him out; I was mad. And he wouldn’t blame me a bit for
being mad; but he said he hadn’t asked for any answer yet, and wouldn’t
take one till he did ask for it; and that we mustn’t worry you with
Cousin Jane’s nonsense, and all that.

“Things rocked along at Christmas, except that I cared more than ever.
But when I came back last spring to stay, as soon as you were really
better, David began to show me that he—you know, Mammy Lil, how much
little things can be made to mean. And I began to see he did care just
as I did. We were so happy in April! Only, I kept staving the end of it
off. I didn’t want to be pinned down too soon. But David—he understood.

“Then Cousin Jane had to take a hand again. She’d found out Bob White
wanted to marry me—or thought he did; and Bob is what she calls a
‘catch.’ She nabbed me that day, as I was coming home from Milly’s, and
said the hatefullest things you ever heard in your life—that everybody
said I was ‘setting my cap’ for David and pretending to be taking care
of you when I was just running after him; and that David had given her
to understand he felt very badly about it, because he knew you and I
wanted it so much!

“I knew as well as I knew my name that was a lie out of whole cloth; but
I was just as angry as if it were true. I never had been reconciled to
caring about him before he spoke, anyway. So I went to Cousin Jane’s, as
she told me to, and listened to Bob White’s praises till I was sick of
everything under the sun. And when David and I went out that
afternoon—Mammy Lil, can’t you understand?”

“Dear, I did it myself, once; I ought to understand. But I paid for it
afterwards, as you have done. When you’re an old lady like me you’ll
know better.”

“I know better now,” she said, with a sudden quiver in her voice. “I—I
killed David’s respect for me that afternoon.”

“Nonsense, child,” I exclaimed, “he knows you—and loves you—too well
for that.”

“He doesn’t love me at all; he can’t. I let him think—I pretended—I’d
just been flirting with him; to lead Bob on.” Her voice died in a shamed
silence.

This was serious news, considering David’s nature. If he believed she
really cared for some one else, I knew it would take a long time for the
notion to work out of his head; and while it was in there he wouldn’t
stir. And I had promised not to interfere. I stroked her soft hair in
silence for a minute.

“David will never change in his love for you, dear,” I said; “it’s too
truly a part of him for that. And when people really love one another,
they come together, somehow, soon or late; your Daddy Jack and I were
hopelessly separated for weeks.”

“We’ve been separated nearly three months,” said Caro, dolefully;
“eleven weeks and four days today. But I’m not going to talk about David
any more. What hurts me most of all is the way I’ve treated you. You
ought to hate me if you don’t. I—”

I laid my hand over her mouth.

“What’s the use of being older than you if I can’t understand, child?
And I’ve travelled every step of the way before. Everything that isn’t
right will come right between you and David; but with you and me
everything is right already. Just drop your troubles under the trees,
dearie, as I do, and open your heart to the hills and the sky. Isn’t
today worth yesterday’s storm?”

She sat up and looked across the Valley. The mountains stood out in the
afternoon sunlight all the clearer for the long shadows already
gathering in the hollows; each leaf and grass blade was shining fresh
after the rain, and everywhere was a flutter and stir of wings. A
nuthatch crept down a locust trunk before us, a yellow-billed cuckoo
slipped by overhead; and all down the hillside the swallows swept in
long, beautiful curves, their bright breasts shining against the sun.

“Dear,” I said presently, “don’t you see, out of doors here, how wise it
is to take the long look at life? The mountains make me ashamed of my
fretting. And life is working toward this beauty all the time; the
winters in the way don’t matter; they pass. And yet before they pass
they teach us to love life better when it re-appears. When your
happiness is safe in your hands once more, you won’t hurt it again for a
child’s anger or a fool’s speech. I know; for I learned it, too.”

She laid her cheek against my hand in silence, and we watched together
while the sun went down. The blue shadows overflowed the hollows of the
mountains and met across the green ridges on their sides. Against that
shadowed background the poplars of the Garden, smitten by the last rays
of sunlight, shone like silver, and the locusts like fronds of gold.

Far below, in the Valley, lay the peace of the coming twilight, and all
about us were the soft murmuring of birdlings settling down to rest, and
of mothers crooning over them as they slept. And at last the gardener
came over from the Madam’s, and wheeled me back, with Caro by my side.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 2nd._ The Peon is with David now, and I shall soon be having
news. He did not start as early as he hoped, and was detained on the
way; but being there at last, he will soon be able to tell me something
definite about David’s coming home. I haven’t meddled a meddle: not that
I’ve earned any frill to my halo thereby; it’s just that I know by my
own past Caro would catch up with me if I tried it, even if I hadn’t
promised David. So I’m pinning my hopes to the Peon: he has been so very
non-committal that he must have something on his mind. But I can’t share
these hopes with Caro, and they wouldn’t help her if I could: she is in
that stage of penitence where it is against her principles for her to
accept consolation, so far as David is concerned. Her misery, poor
little soul, is the only comfort she can allow herself; and if her
happiness is to have a thorough recovery, the process cannot be hurried.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 5th._ I woke at half-past four this morning to find a fat white
cloud sitting on the lawn outside, as if he owned the premises. Not a
mountain visible; and beneath the locusts’ misty arches the trees on the
neighboring lawn gleam pale and uncertain, mere grey-green ghosts of
living things.

The cloud isn’t altogether outside. My books on the stand beside me are
arching their covers with the dampness, and my field-glasses are moist
to the touch; the room feels dank and uncanny, and the heavy air is hard
to breathe. One needs a mental rain-coat on a day like this—especially
when no letters come from a sky-larking Peon!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 8th._ Days of rain on the parched earth. Gray days, with soft
mists heaped against the mountains, blending earth and sky in one. Days
when one’s horizon is lost—not gone, but withdrawn from sight; days
when the mountains have vanished and the valleys melted away, and
nothing is very clear to consciousness but this small bed and the pain
which lies upon it. If mists crept as close about one’s inner vision,
doubt would seem normal on days like this, and despair the quintessence
of common sense. Yet under the veiling vapors the brown grass is growing
green again, the hard earth soft, instinct with power, and prodigal of
gifts once more.

Now comes a distant roll of thunder, a wind that sweeps the vapors from
the grass as tears are wiped from sodden eyes, a flash of blinding
light, a bending and tossing of leaf-laden boughs; and over the mountain
the storm-cloud rises, black against the pale gray of the sky. Then up
the valley comes the wall of water; and behind it the world is new.

                 *        *        *        *        *

A special delivery letter from the Peon! Caro stood by while I opened
it, asking nothing, but her color coming and going. It was only a few
lines; but it said he would be here on the tenth. He has written not a
word since he has been out there about the things nearest to all our
hearts; but at least we shall know something in two days more.




                                  XII
                        IN THE GARDEN OF DELIGHT


_August 10th._ They are having a picnic supper on Bare Rock this
evening, from which nobody in the house is excused but myself. I am glad
they are all gone, for I need a little solitude, in this sudden
whirlwind of happiness, to catch my breath and take a twist on my
emotions.

For the Peon, who is so literally truthful that nobody dares to suspect
him of juggling with words, deliberately stole a march on us and walked
in twenty-four hours ahead of time—with David! Caro and I were over in
the Garden. I was just where I am now, between the altheas and the
locusts; but Caro, who had been wandering restlessly about, had gone
down the hillside, out of sight, following an unknown bird-note. I was
looking at the poplar branch where the caterpillars had clustered. They
had left it stripped of everything but the leaf-stalks, which stood out
now from the bare twigs at every angle, like drunken pins in a cushion.
But the birds had days ago avenged both the branch and me, for not a
crawler was visible on the tree. I was looking at it idly when the Peon
and David suddenly stood under it, coming round the big bed of
hydrangeas between it and the gate!

I scarcely saw the Peon for looking at David; but David was looking for
somebody else.

“Where’s Caro?” he demanded, as he kissed me. “They said at the house
she was over here with you.”

“She’s beyond that little corner of woods,” I said; “go around there and
you’ll see her.”

As he went I fell upon the Peon, and extracted the hitherto suppressed
information that Bob White’s engagement to some visitor from Kentucky
had been announced last month. The Peon had forgotten her name; but he
carried the news to David, who decided it was time for him to see Caro
at once. And the mischief of a time he was taking about it, too, the
Peon observed impatiently; didn’t they intend to take us into the secret
before midnight?

As it was still half an hour to sunset, I reproved him properly; but I
was myself beginning to fear something had gone wrong when they appeared
at last. The dusk had fallen, and I could not see their faces clearly;
but I heard a soft, happy laugh from Caro before they came around the
corner of the woods, and I knew everything was all right.

David had certainly not wasted his time. They were already considering
the house that must be built on the knoll the Peon and I had selected
years ago. It seems he had picked it out himself, and Caro had agreed to
it, in her mud-pie days. Now, having waited so long, and finding Caro in
a mood of undreamed-of submissiveness, he had taken matters into his own
hands, and decided that he would go home as soon as they could settle on
the plans, and begin the house at once.

“We’ll need it, even so, before we can possibly get into it,” he
observed to me. “Do you remember what you said to me that night about
our wedding? I told Caro about it this afternoon, and she couldn’t deny
that we ought not to start out in life by disgracing you as a prophet.
So it’s to be before Christmas—in September, I think.”

“I think you’ve lost your wits,” replied Caro. “It won’t be Christmas if
Mammy Lil isn’t walking about everywhere by Thanksgiving. She needn’t
expect us to live up to her prophecies if she won’t do it herself.”

“But I will,” I replied cheerfully; “I feel it in my bones.”

“It’s surely time,” said David, turning my chair to the gate. The Peon
and Caro walked on ahead, and the boy bent down and rubbed my cheek with
his.

“Sweet Mammy, I know I’ve been hard on you these months; but we’ll both
make it up to you now. Forgive us this time, and let us help to make you
well at last.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 22nd._ What beautiful, happy days we have had! I showed the Peon
all the wonders of the Garden; and David and Caro strayed in and out,
sometimes with the Madam and her other guests, and sometimes in that
dual solitude lovers crave.

I told the Peon about Grumpy one day. I never had mentioned him before,
because I never had been quite sure, if I did, that it wouldn’t break
the spell I had woven, and allow him to appear to others as well as to
me. But I’m not afraid of him any more.

The Peon is so satisfactory! He never thought of laughing at me, but
took in the situation at once. He said the best way to make sure of
getting rid of the wretch was for him to carry Grumpy away when he went.
He could put him in his suit-case—for Grumpy really is the tiniest
creature imaginable to make all the trouble he does; and he could throw
him out of the car window as they were crossing some deep gorge in the
mountains where no human habitation had ever been. A blue devil can’t
possibly live where there are no people; so there’d be an end of his
mischief forever.

Wasn’t that the cleverest scheme? We caught him together yesterday
afternoon, and rammed him into the suit-case, good and tight. And I told
the Peon, before he went, that if he did many more stunts like that,
he’d be a very satisfactory playmate for me when the children are grown
up and in their own house.

And that is the end of Grumpy.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 23rd._ They have gone back, taking the plans for the house with
them. Caro and David sketched them together, and he will have them
worked out at home.

I think Caro half envies him the pleasure of beginning the nest
building, and wants to be there to see; but nobody is willing for me to
go back before the first of October; and the child has a deal of
shopping to do. I will wait here; and Caro will go to New York and visit
Edith Mason, while she selects her bridal plumage.

I find the birds most joyful company these days, and am planning to
cultivate their acquaintance in a less formal manner; for I intend to
get out of this chair.

A wheeled-chair is really an exasperating place to study birds from: I
wonder I never realized it before. This very day the trees are full of
them—new birds, many of them, gathering for the fall migration. They
have been playing hide-and-seek with me all the afternoon—a charming
game if one can do one’s own part of it, and go seeking when the other
hides; but if you can’t, it’s not so hilarious. They poke unknown heads
through the leaves, and survey me coolly. They whisk tails I can’t even
guess at from behind a limb, and are gone. They sing high overhead, with
only a bit of their under feathers visible, or flirt a half-seen wing
behind an opening in the leaves. Sorting heads, tails, and middles is a
hopeless job when you haven’t an idea which belongs to which. If it were
only a Chinese puzzle, you’d know when it was solved; but a tail with
any other head would look as sweet! I’ve thought all summer that if a
hyper-developed sense of touch can serve the blind for eyes, surely time
and patience could do the work of feet for me; but I’m thinking patience
may cease to be a virtue soon!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 26th._ We have had two days of storm. They mark both a beginning
and an end; for a subtle change has passed over the mountains and
lingers, though wind and rain be gone. A tinge of brown, merely
suspected before, has deepened and spread until it challenges and
commands the eye. Some of the nearer trees look seared, and the poplars,
especially, look withered and old. But there is a beauty of soul deeper
than that of the flesh and of youth: and the depth and power of Nature’s
charm, like the freedom of our own souls, can be best measured by the
number and splendor of the things which can be laid aside. All the
glamour of the young spring, the splendid lavishness of summer days, the
riot of color and sunshine—these things, which yearly draw us with new
fascination and delight, are but the broidered outer curtain of the
temple. They lure us past them, into the inner court, to a strength
which knows no defeat, to an abundance which can afford to be stripped;
to Law which cannot be thwarted nor checked; and beyond Law to a Power
which reason can neither explain nor explain away.

For myself, I have my message; the hills have spoken it. And the pain
which wrenches is back where it belongs, in the second place—or the
twentieth. Moreover, it will pass—tomorrow, or next year, or in a
life-time: it is not of the things which remain.

And now the clouds are breaking for a sunset glory, and the porch where
I lie, and the lawn beyond it, even the shadowed mountains—all, all,
are flooded with splendid light.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 29th._ A letter from Cousin Jane at last! Caro and I both wrote
to her while David was here, but she had not vouchsafed a reply. David
had a satisfactory interview with Cousin Chad, after his return, but
reported Cousin Jane’s reception of him as one befitting an unrepentant
prodigal who had brought his swine home with him. So we have been
looking forward to the reception of a letter from her as a very solemn
occasion indeed. She seems inclined, however, to temper her disapproval
to Caro. She doesn’t expect her to be happy long, she says; and she
handsomely offers not to disturb her present dreams, but to wait until
Caro is disillusioned, when she hopes her “I told you so” will do some
good. She does not intend, however, to cause any breach in the family,
her principles forbidding her to quarrel even with me; and she is
perfectly willing to continue her efforts to set me a proper example.

I suppose, on the whole, that’s doing pretty well for Cousin Jane. I
don’t intend to have any breach in the family, myself, especially over
the children’s wedding; and Caro and I will find some way to appease her
when we go home.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_August 30th._ What bird is that? He is in the locust yonder, only his
breast visible. It is a vivid yellow, with four irregular scarlet
spots—three on one side and one on the other—and across his breast a
long zig-zag line of scarlet like a jagged wound. There isn’t any bird
like that: I know it; and if he doesn’t, he ought to. Yet there he sits,
as calm as if he were in all the books and had as much right in the
Garden as I. I have watched him, and recorded him, yet he doesn’t move.

Well, I’ll just make him: I’m not tied to this chair!

A scarlet tanager, moulting! No wonder I never saw that before. He is
always scarlet-and-black when he goes through Tennessee in the spring,
and yellow and olive when he goes back in the fall. He looks like the
clown in a circus now, and I don’t wonder that he seeks the seclusion of
the mountains to change his clothes. He is gone, of course, before I can
apologize for my intrusion; and I suppose his opinion of me is scarcely
fit to print.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_September 18th._ Caro is back from New York, and we leave a week from
today. We have decided to shave a few days off the limit set by the
Peon: if we don’t hurry, David will have that house half finished before
we get there, and we want to see it go up from the beginning ourselves.
Besides, Caro wants a little time with Milly. Her wedding is set for the
last of October, and Caro’s is to be six weeks later. I’m afraid it will
take strenuous work to get Cousin Jane where we want her by that time;
but if we go home and start on her at once, the thing may be done.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_September 24th._ The last day in the Garden! The Mistress has been out,
and I have been trying, in rather a bungling way, to make her understand
what she has done for me. Neither she nor the Madam can know the whole
of it, and I hope they never will; for they would have to live in the
same prison-house to understand what a door of escape means.

Eh, but the summer is over, and I count my stay by hours!—Yes; but the
summer will never end. Even when the prison is lost sight of, the door
of escape will remain a delight. The things that hurt pass, and are
forgotten; things not understood change and grow clear: but joy does not
change, not kindness, nor anything that makes life worth while. And so,
good-bye to the Garden.




                                  XIII
                      WHILE THE NEST WAS BUILDING


_September 30th._ We reached home three days ago, having forestalled the
possibility of orders not to come by concealing our plans until we were
on the way.

The house is no house at all yet, of course. Caro calls it the Perchery
at present, and says she will give it a name when we can all sit in it,
instead of roosting on stones outside and staring at the place where it
is going to be. But the cellar is finished, anyway, and is of ample
proportions, as a country cellar should be; and until we get something
else to admire, we find it an absorbing subject of contemplation. Even
Cousin Jane was delighted with it, and still more with Caro’s promise to
go home with her and stay until after the wedding.

Caro went over there as soon as I was settled in bed for a rest, and
came back glowing with triumph. Cousin Jane was coming in the morning to
spend the day, and to take the child back home with her in the evening.

“And oh, Mammy Lil, she’s perfectly charmed with David, and quite
certain she picked him out for me! The shock of it nearly bowled me over
for a minute. You know that big New York bank that failed a week or two
ago? Everybody thought Bob’s father’s bank was mixed up in it, and there
was a regular run on it. David and Daddy Jack were too full of the
Perchery to mention it; but it converted Cousin Jane straight through.
The bank’s all right—I asked David about it, driving home—but you
can’t make Cousin Jane believe it. She thinks a bank should be above
suspicion by anybody, and if it isn’t, it’s a whited sepulchre
forevermore. So she’s delighted that she had the good sense to pass over
a fellow like Bob, who comes from a family of speculators, and choose
for me a good, steady, kind, reliable business man like David Bird,
instead. I wish you could hear her, Mammy Lil; she’s downright edifying.
And she fairly beamed on David, though he hadn’t been near her for
weeks. Everything’s all right, if only the hot weather doesn’t make you
sick. If they’d told us how hot it was, I wouldn’t have brought you
home.”

The heat was extraordinary for the time of the year, and still continues
so; but it didn’t keep Cousin Jane at home, though usually she won’t
budge unless it’s cool.

She was in high good humor, and evidenced it by a peck on my cheek and
the remark that I must be getting better, for I really didn’t look so
very many years older than I was. She approved of the plans for the
house, especially when she found it was to be our wedding gift to Caro;
and she went out “to perch,” at Caro’s invitation, and admired every
stone in the foundations. Then she came in and settled seriously down to
the subject of clothes.

It seems that Grace is lavishing on Milly’s outfit all the pretty things
Cousin Jason prevented her from giving the child in her girlhood; and
Cousin Jane’s family pride has risen in a most desirable and unexpected
manner to demand that Caro shall be as well provided for as her cousin;
so Caro can prepare in peace. Cousin Jane even proposes to help her,
tooth and nail. Caro and I are a little daunted by this excess of zeal,
Cousin Jane’s taste—or lack of it—being a byword in the family. But
Caro will find a way to manage her; and we have already settled the
question of the dress she is to wear at the wedding. I had Caro buy it
for me in New York—a soft, rich, silken fabric—and it is to be made by
the best dressmaker in the city. If we left it to Cousin Jane, she would
get old black Sally to make it, at seventy-five cents a day; she says
it’s sinful to waste money on town dress-makers.

But she doesn’t mind my wasting it for her. If there was a corner of her
heart still congealed it melted when she took the silk between her
finger and thumb, and fully tested its quality.

“It’s an elegant present, Lyddy,” she declared graciously, “an’ I don’t
mind taking it from you one mite. I’ve always said you meant well; an’
it ain’t your fault if you’re foolish.”

Could I ask for a handsomer coat of white-wash than that?

                 *        *        *        *        *

_October 2nd._ Last night was sticky, hot, and still, with the stars
flaming overhead, as though they were trying to burn the heavens. I fell
asleep at last, to be wakened suddenly by a sound as if the wind were
ripping the sky off the earth, and ten million tons of water were
sluicing through the hole. The world was all one glare of light, with
sudden, momentary breaks of darkness, while a roar as of a thousand
batteries surged up from every quarter of the heavens, and filled to
bursting the black void above our heads. I sprang up to close the
windows, my ankles brushed by quick, ghostly touches, as loose papers
skittered over the floor.

The Peon and David came in, in hastily donned attire, for the storm was
altogether out of the ordinary. The house trembled like a living thing,
and in the air about us we could feel the crackle of the blinding light.
Then came a crash that split the earth. A moment later, through the
surging billows of water hurled through the wind-rent air, we saw a
sudden, leaping light, red in the white electric glare. A huddled
company of straw-stacks had been struck by the descending bolt, and not
even that flood of water could quench the flames. The heavy clouds,
weighted almost to earth, caught the sullen glow beneath them, and as
they were flung onward and upward by the screaming wind, carried the
lurid colors of destruction far into the blackness overhead. One moment
a world of blinding white, as the lightning blotted out everything but
its own wild glare. The next, a red and lowering world, sullen,
portentous, with the evil color spreading, climbing, licking out on all
sides in an orgy of ruin and waste whose greed defied the cataracts of
water, and made the wild wind its minister and slave.

The air rocked with the thunderous down-pour under the crashing clouds.
One of the maples fell prone in the lightning’s glare; and from every
side came the sound of rending wood as branches were wrenched and split
and hurled across the lawn. The house shook, while around us and above
us the Titans fought. In the presence of that unveiled power one’s own
small life dwindled to nothingness. One marveled that human feebleness
yet held a place in a world so charged with forces, the least of which
could wipe out all human effort and leave the earth as bare as a
new-sponged slate.

Yet the fury passed. The Titans screamed and fought, but their power
waned. The wind wavered and sank, sobbing like a beaten child; the rain
splashed dully, dripping from porches and eaves; the thunder died on
distant hills, and the lightnings grew fitful and weak. Even the
storm-born flames were spent, until only a hot coal of light glowed
under the breaking clouds. A star shone here and there, mirrored in the
rain-pools of the drenched fields.

David opened the windows, and we drank in the freshness of the
storm-cleansed air. The new-washed leaves, still green with summer time,
whispered in the quietness, and here and there a cricket chirped, or a
night-bird called to its mate. Power was veiled again, withdrawn; and
life that had trembled in the balance resumed its wonted course.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_October 9th._ I asked Grace today about Cousin Jason. I knew she was
worrying over something. Milly might be happy, but she wasn’t. So I
asked her how he did.

“He won’t speak to me, Lil, at all. I have been there two or three
times; but he wouldn’t see me.”

“Isn’t he coming to the wedding?” I asked.

“I wrote to ask him that—to show him we really wanted him; but he sent
the letter back.”

Her eyes filled with unwonted tears, and I had a sudden desire to jerk
my jay-bird cousin’s feathers out by the roots.

“You’ll just have to train your thoughts to keep away from him, Grace,”
I said. “I know you can, for I’ve steered my own clear of a lot of
things I simply don’t dare to fool with. Don’t shake your head at me,
madam! Do you think Milly doesn’t see that look in your eyes when you
sit and think about Cousin Jason? Are you going to let him hurt her?”

“No, I’m not,” she said firmly. “I’ll make my eyes behave.”

“Then you’ll have to make your thoughts behave behind your eyes. You let
Cousin Jason alone. If you’ll quit paying attention to him long enough,
he’ll come round; but as long as you give him a chance to rebuff you,
he’ll amuse himself doing it.”

Grace laughed.

“Shall I follow your advice or your example—you door-mat for Cousin
Jane?”

I laughed myself.

“Never mind. We can find out how to do a thing perfectly, many a time,
just by doing it the way it shouldn’t be done. And I did send Cousin
Jane home once. I know the recording angel put that down to my credit.”

We fell to talking of her plans. Milly and her husband are to live with
her, he going in to his business daily, like the Peon. But Grace wants
them to have this first winter alone together. So as soon as they get
back from their wedding trip, and Caro is married, she expects to go
away with George’s niece, and spend the winter travelling.

The Peon and I will stay at Bird Corners. The children will be gone for
five or six weeks, and by the time they come home the Perchery will
almost be ready for them to begin feathering their nest—And to think
it’s the real Bird Corners, and not Make-Believe at all!

                 *        *        *        *        *

_October 16th._ The young mocking-birds are learning to sing, and their
efforts are altogether charming. They sit apart, crooning, each to
himself, trying their score over and over, thoughtfully, with pauses in
which they seem to search their memories for forgotten notes. It is as
if melody had come with them from the land of dreams, and they were
trying to catch and hold the elusive sweetness, and teach it to come at
their command. The soft, dreamy music floats through the October
sunshine, at once a memory and a hope. It is a song of the garnered
years, an inheritance from old days of love and aspiration, and it
presages days of love and aspiration yet to be. But more than both of
these, it voices the peace of autumn days, when the earth has finished
the long year’s toil, and turns to its hard-won rest in the quiet of the
misty sunshine.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_October 20th._ I don’t need my note-book these days. When one can do so
much living with people the birds are no longer a necessity. I hear
their songs and calls, and know them for the voices of my friends—real
friends for life. But Caro comes over nearly every day, and always there
is so much to talk about. And often Cousin Jane comes too; and it’s
positively exhilarating to see the way Caro and I are corrupting her
morals. That old lady is getting as worldly-minded as if there were not
a blackbird saint in existence.

The dressmaker made her get a modern corset to be fitted in, and she’s
so pleased with herself in it that she wears it all the time. She really
looks like another person, for Caro has coaxed her into curl-papers o’
nights, and the soft gray fluff around her face is amazingly different
from the wide part with the flat straight bands plastered over her
temples and ears. The old Buff Orpington doesn’t know her any more, and
Caro says he shrieks and runs at the sight of her.

Everybody in Chatterton notices the change, and tells her she looks
years younger—as she does; and the other evening Cousin Chad took up
the tale, and grew positively sentimental, right before Caro. Cousin
Jane blushed and bridled as she must have done over forty years ago, and
next day she bought the prettiest stuff for a house dress, and carried
it to the wedding-gown dressmaker to make! She says it’s every woman’s
Christian duty to be attractive in her own home, and that if Chadwell
will be a boy and like frippery, she’ll have to give in to him; the Lord
didn’t give men much sense anyway, and you just have to humor them
along, like children.

I feel rather ashamed of myself, I must confess. I’ve been laughing at
her all these years, like all the rest of the family, and been cross
with her inside, often. And what she needed most was for somebody to see
the simple human need for praise and petting under all her strident
aggressiveness; for as soon as she got it she blossomed out like this! I
said as much to Caro today, and she cocked her head suddenly to one side
as if she heard someone calling her. Then she jumped up, laughing, spun
around on one toe, and caught me in her arms. She said I’d given her
such a big idea I’d taken her breath away. She wouldn’t tell me what it
was, but ran off to the buggy and drove singing down to the gate.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_October 24th._ Caro has given me the shock of my life. I’ve seen she
had some kind of bee in her bonnet for three or four days, but she was
bent on being mysterious, so I didn’t tease.

Yesterday, as I sat on the side porch, whipping lace, I saw her buggy
coming out from between the cedars, and Cousin Jason was in it! Caro was
beaming, as usual, and Cousin Jason looked as if he were having a good
time, and embarrassed to know what to do with it. I went to meet them as
they drove toward the Perchery.

He greeted me awkwardly, and explained that Caro wanted him to see her
house, and that he’d had no more sense than to give in to her and come.
Caro dashed at him at once.

“You mean you had sense enough to come,” she corrected. “Cousin Jason
really has lots of sense, Mammy Lil, only he thought it was nonsense and
tried his best to hide it. We’re going up to town together tomorrow on a
lark—just we two.”

“I haven’t promised yet,” he growled.

“You needn’t promise,” said Caro sweetly. “I told you it wasn’t
necessary. All you need to do is to go.”

She made him admire the house and the plans; and when he objected to her
numerous closets she assured him that his ideas were all wrong, and that
the lack of closets in his own house was the root of most of his
troubles; he needed them to pack his skeletons in, instead of
entertaining them in public. They went off together presently; but Caro
promised to come back this evening and spend the night. I knew I should
have the tale then.

She came, and the three of us had dinner together, the Peon being in
town. And now that she and David are at the piano in the next room, I
must finish the story.

She went straight from here the other day to Cousin Jason’s, and told
him she wanted him to come to Milly’s wedding and give the bride away.
He was too amazed to be angry at first; and when he did get angry, Caro
stood her ground, kept her temper, and gave him what she called a
preachment—a mixture of fun, coaxing, and straight-from-the-shoulder
talking. She made no impression, apparently, so when she was ready to go
she left, assuring him cheerfully that she would be back in the morning
and take the matter up with him again.

He had always liked Caro, and her sheer audacity pleased him. She took
her work the next morning and spent the day. When Cousin Jason grew
weary of argument, he went out on the farm; but Caro was there when he
came back. She had carried over various good things to eat, and gave him
a lunch such as he hadn’t enjoyed since he left Grace’s. She argued,
coaxed, ridiculed, and scolded. And by the time David, who was sworn to
secrecy, came by to take her driving, Cousin Jason had promised to think
the matter over.

I don’t believe it was what the child said that impressed his stubborn
nature; he simply found Caro herself irresistible.

When she left him that day, his anger with Grace, she said, was really a
crumbling ruin; but he didn’t realize it; so she went back next morning
to topple it to its fall. By the middle of the afternoon he had said
that if he could be convinced Grace really wanted him, he would go. Caro
immediately challenged him to go there with her to dinner that night,
take Grace by surprise, and see for himself. When he refused she taunted
him with backing out of his own test, and dared him to the scratch. She
telephoned Grace finally that she wanted to bring a friend to dinner,
and they drove over together.

“Milly and Bobolink were out in his car,” she said; “and Cousin Grace
didn’t see us coming. We walked right in on her in the living-room
before she knew he was there.” Caro paused to wipe her eyes. “I’ll cry
for six months whenever I think about it. I don’t see how Cousin Grace
can care so much—he’s been so hateful to her. I thought she was going
to faint at first. Then she stood there speechless, her hands stretched
out, and her face the most beautiful thing I ever saw. He called her
name and went toward her, and she just slipped into his arms with one
long sob, as if her heart were breaking. And I went out and shut the
door.”

When Milly came in she was plainly overjoyed, for her mother’s sake, if
not for his; and Bobolink, Caro declared, behaved like an archangel. She
inconsistently elucidated this remark by explaining that he had been
brought up on a farm and was as crazy about the country as I am myself;
and he has always kept up his knowledge of agriculture and his interest
in it. Cousin Jason, who had taken him for what he politely terms a city
fool, thawed visibly toward him during the evening. And before he left
he had promised to give the bride away.

Caro, who believes in striking while the iron is hot, offered to go to
town with him the next day to order his dress-suit for the occasion. As
the wedding is to be on the twenty-ninth, there is certainly no time to
lose. But Cousin Jason, who has scorned conventionality all his life,
balked instantly, and declared that if he had to make a fool of himself
to do it he wouldn’t come to the wedding at all.

Grace agreed at once to his wearing anything he chose; but Caro was
resolved to carry her point.

“You see, Mammy Lil, he was just in retreat, and I had to rout him. If I
had let him make a stand about the clothes he’d wear I’d have been
throwing away my victory. So I told him he had to have a dress-suit.
He’d need it for my wedding as well as Milly’s. I didn’t tell him before
Cousin Grace; I waited till he drove me back to Cousin Jane’s. And next
day I went over again to sit up with him about it.”

“He ought to have admired your persistence.”

“That’s just what I told him. He began to weaken a little, so I brought
him over and showed him the Perchery as a reward. And he went this very
day. The tailor said he couldn’t make it in time, and Cousin Jason
crowed and said he’d told me so. But I explained to the tailor that he
could make it, and that he had it to do. So he agreed. We bought gloves,
and a tie, and everything; and I made him get his hair cut, and he’s
going to look scrumptious. You really haven’t an idea what can be done
with an old relation till you begin to furbish him up.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

_October 30th._ Milly was married in church, and she and Cousin Jason
and Grace stopped by here on their way to the wedding for me to see
them. Milly was beautiful, and no bride but Caro could be sweeter; and
Grace, all in silvery gray, with that deep light in her eyes, was like
nothing but the Moonlight Sonata. As to Cousin Jason, he was furbished
almost past recognition; and my admiration pleased him like a boy.

Caro fluttered about them, radiant in her bridesmaid’s dress, and
followed by David’s adoring eyes. The Peon escorted Grace; and after
awhile I watched the carriages coming back. Before they left for the
station Caro telephoned me, and Uncle Milton wheeled me down to the
gate, where I waved my handkerchief and cast my handful of rice as they
drove by, Milly’s exquisite face alight with a look her husband may well
carry in his heart always.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_November 29th._ How fast the days slip by! Milly came home early in the
week, and yesterday was the Thanksgiving I prophesied about to David
last spring.

Certainly I am going all about the house; and to emphasize my success as
a seer we had a family gathering at Thanksgiving dinner. The bride and
groom were here, of course, and Grace, who leaves as soon as Caro is
married, and Cousin Jason—resplendent, by the way, in his dress-suit,
which he considered a capital joke on Caro. Cousin Jane looked not a day
over fifty, and Cousin Chad had done some furbishing himself to keep her
company.

To think of a dinner party at Bird Corners again, after all these years!
The Peon and I beamed at one another from the ends of the table; and in
the centre, the bride and groom faced the bride-and-groom-to-be, with
the older people tucked in at the corners. And it was all so good to see
and hear—such a fairy tale come true—that, as I lie here today
resting, I am just too happy for words.

David and Caro are to be married next Wednesday—married here, at Bird
Corners. I dare not risk going to the church yet, and Cousin Jane’s is
quite as far away. Besides, both the children want it here, and it is
and always has been Caro’s home as well as David’s. Cousin Jane has
really been sweet about it; and it is all settled that she and Caro are
to come over in time for me to help dress the bride. Grace is coming
tomorrow, and will stay with me until it is all over and she goes away
herself.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_December 9th._ The wedding day was perfect—cloudless blue, and the
little red wren singing his matins in the lilac almost before it was
light. I am glad the child is a winter bride. She can afford to ignore
the seasons, for she carries spring-time in her heart, like her namesake
out of doors.

It was all beautiful, and I with my own hands helped to make it so. But
nothing about it is very clear to me except the look in the children’s
eyes—_our_ children, both of them, at last. Caro’s joy had sobered her,
so that she walked the earth in radiance, instead of fluttering,
light-winged, above it; but David’s joy had set him on the heights. Oh,
my son, my son, child of my soul always! I could not have borne the look
upon his face if I had not known Caro through and through. But now I am
not afraid.

Grace went the day after the wedding, and left me in a world where real
and Make-Believe are blended into one. The Peon comes home early, and
together we walk across the grass to the Perchery, and talk of how he
wheeled me there in those sorrowful days last spring, when it seemed the
knoll would never know the nest we longed to see there. And in the
evening we sit in the firelight together, and hear the childish voices
of long ago in the room, and childish feet in the hall. And we laugh
over the good old days, and smile over the new days, which are better.
And before I go to bed we go to the window and look at the children’s
house, standing clear against the stars. And they come and stand beside
us there, their tiny hands in ours—the dear, long-ago little children,
who will be with us always, though the big children, dearer still, come
and go across the grass between their home and ours.

                                THE END

                 *        *        *        *        *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Punctuation and obvious typesetting errors have been corrected without
note. When variation in spelling or hyphenation occurred, majority use
has been employed.

[End of _In the Garden of Delight_, by Lily Hardy Hammond]





End of Project Gutenberg's In the Garden of Delight, by Lily Hardy Hammond

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE GARDEN OF DELIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 63729-0.txt or 63729-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/7/2/63729/

Produced by Mardi Desjardins & the online Distributed
Proofreaders Canada team at https://www.pgdpcanada.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

